Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	"Thus begin the words of Albucasis."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	"Oh, children, since I have completed for you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, according to its perfection and conclusion, and through its explanations and statements, it seems to me that I complete it for you with this treatise on surgery."
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	"For the practice of surgery is much neglected in our region and time, such that it is almost lost to science, its traces are obscured; and there remain only a few small descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which are changed over time and lead astray those who follow them, because their intentions are unclear and the strength of this art is diminished."
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	"It seems to me that I should revive this (science) with an ordered treatise, in accordance with the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and that it should come accompanied by illustrations of cautery instruments and other tools used in surgery, for addition to the explanations and preparation of them, which is necessary."
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	"But the reason why there is no good practitioner of surgery in our time is because the art of medicine is extensive, and its practitioner must first be well-versed in the science of anatomy, which teaches the arrangement of the members and their shapes, their connections and separations; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, muscles, their number and proportion; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their outlets."
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	"And therefore Hippocrates said that 'in name it is great, but in deed small,' especially in surgery."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	"But as we have already said at the beginning of this book, whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will surely fall into error, which causes many deaths among people, as I have seen happen too often, since some are formed in this science but depart from it without knowledge or experience."
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor accidentally cut an escrophilus tumor in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in her neck causing her to bleed profusely and die suddenly."
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	"And I saw another doctor who tried to remove a stone from the bladder of a man in whom it had formed, and while doing so he tore a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day."
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	"And I myself had already predicted that this would happen, and knew beforehand that he would die because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient."
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	"And I saw another doctor who received payment from one of our dukes to practice surgery, and attempted to reset the thighbone of a black man who had suffered a fracture there. The doctor prepared himself with ignorance, reset the fracture on top of the joint without leaving room for breathing, using pillows and bolsters with great force."
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	"And he bound him up according to his desires, and applied poultices, and left him thus for several days commanding that he not be unbound. And so it was done until the thigh and knee became inflamed, and this resulted in destruction."
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	"And I was called to him, and prepared to remove the bandages, and thus tranquility was restored and he was freed from his pain."
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	"But nevertheless the corruption had already become established in the limb, so that I could not restrain it, and corruption continued to spread through the limb until the patient perished."
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	"And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess and within a few days it became ulcerated and greatly worsened upon its lord."
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	"This is because the caustic humor of cancer is melancholic, and therefore it should not be treated with iron alone, but rather that part of the body which suffers from it should be cauterized."
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you to distinguish between two kinds of operations with the hand: one is an operation that brings about health, and another that involves danger in the greatest positions."
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	"And I have already mentioned this in every part of this book where operation is associated with error and danger; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against this and leave it alone, so that foolish people do not find a way to speak and dishonor you."
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	"And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and approach illnesses with skillfulness and steadfastness."
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"And follow the best way by the grace of God to obtain health and worthy success, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and wield your weapons against what causes you fear, so that your trust in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for more remains to your glory, both here on earth and hereafter, and your sanctity."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	"Because I have already discussed in some of my writings:"
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"No medicus medicine malae, ne malignos medicos nominem."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have already divided this book into three parts."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first part."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter arranged concerning the head, regarding the forms of instruments and the irons for cauterization, and what is necessary in operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"The division of the second part."
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter, concerning incision and perforation, cupping glasses, poultices, extraction of arrows and similar objects, all arranged according to the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"Division of the third part."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter, concerning reduction and dislocation, and the cure of torsion and similar things; arranged according to the headings, regarding the forms of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"Of cauterization with fire and with medicine, and remembrance of operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"And with this begins the treatise of the entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"It is necessary for me to say what are the qualities of those who perform cauterization and those who receive it, and in what condition cauterization should be prohibited."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the cauterizer and cauterized is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secret; many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, but for me to speak about all their discourses would be too lengthy."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"And therefore I say that cauterization is beneficial for all conditions universally, whether they have matter or not, except for two conditions, which are those without matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the condition that is dry and without matter, there is disagreement; for some said that cauterization is beneficial in this case, while others said the opposite, that cauterization is not suitable in an illness that is caused by quality and dryness, because fire has the qualities of heat and dryness, and it would not be appropriate for an illness that is dry and without matter to be healed with something that is hot and dry."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And he says that which contradicts this, that cauterization is beneficial in all dry and hot diseases that occur in the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find the body of man cold."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say by the speech of that one, that I have already experienced this many times."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"But it is not necessary that there come upon this that which has already been said and practiced in the chapter of cauterization by the last exercise, and to know the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of diseases in their members, and the causes of these, and the accidents of them, and the space of time for those."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in other compositions there is no fear on you, and especially in hot and humid diseases, for all the physicians are agreed about those, and they are not disagreed in the judgment with cauterization in those."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, son, that the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and its goodness is about cauterization with burning medicine, for fire is simple, whose action does not extend except to the member which is cauterized, and it does not reach another member joined with it without little harm."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of burning medicine extends to that which is near it in members, and often it brings disease into the member which is difficult to heal, and often it extinguishes."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But fire, because of its sublimity and goodness of its substance, does nothing but superfluously. And it is already known to us by experiment and long service in studying the art about the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from lengthening my speech. But if it were not that it was not read in my book in this place to you secretly hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies and of its expulsion by which it expels diseases, with philosophical demonstration, which would serve to clarify your thoughts."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, son, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to perform cauterization, and they consider the best time to be in spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by the time of accident is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary remedies for severe and chronic diseases, which cannot tolerate delay because it is feared that those may come to harm, which is greater than little harm entering through time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And also do not think, son, that only the common people and foolish physicians estimate this, for those diseases which are cured by cauterization are not always suitable at all times, and they consider that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the cause is not as they think for this reason, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the moistures which are the cause of pains."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But nevertheless, cauterization is superfluous on top of medicine because of the violence of its power and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"And it is possible that its disease returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the sick and the location of its disease, and the power of fire and what has been prepared in the body from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what has been acquired by it in its acquisition through foods and similar causes; but the disease in which cauterization has been administered is a subtle disease in a member with few superfluities and moistures, thus as cauterization of the tooth for pain and similar to that one, it is possible that this pain does not return, but it happens rarely."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And moreover common speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is true speech, not because they understand in it what they think, for they believe that there is no cure that profits with medicine nor with any other cause before cauterization."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when administering the methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not help, and therefore cauterization is administered at the end of the cause, and it profits there."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And from now on I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which common people and most foolish physicians understand."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And they said in ancient times that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the place of cauterization does not matter, which is not absolutely true, because I have already proven and demonstrated that this does not happen except in some bodies without others, and cauterization with it is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you perform cauterization with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want due to the roughness of gold, and because it prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust it on ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the artisan does not catch them by his occupation."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And for this reason cauterization is performed with iron more lightly and more appropriately to the rectitude of operation."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and have arranged those of the head within the weights, so that later requesting it you will find what you want from it."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"Of cauterization for headache due to coldness and moisture."
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers humidity and coldness upon the affected organ whose two causes are: its sodden nature and abundance of flux called catarrh, flowing from the head down to the eyes and ears, and causing sleepiness, toothache, sore throat, and universally all diseases that arise from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar afflictions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The procedure for this cauterization is as follows: first, you should command the patient to be purged with a laxative medicine that clears the head, for three or four nights, depending on the severity of their illness, age, and usual habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then you should command him to shave his head with a razor and perform that seat between your thighs on a padded bench, and let him place his feet upon his own chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then you should place the palm of your hand close to the opening of his nose between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	Yet nevertheless, when your hand has reached the middle of the wound, mark that spot with a thread, and then light the olive-oil cautery whose form is as follows:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then place that upon the spot marked with thread, in such a manner that it descends slowly, so that your hand is gradually constrained, and you turn it around.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then gently lift your hand up and look at the spot; if you see any of the bone now uncovered, about as much as the grain of an ergot, then lift your hand up again. If it does not return to its previous position with the iron, use another one until such time as you can see that which I have mentioned to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a little salt and dissolve it over the spot and leave it for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place it on the edge of the wound, folded in half, and leave it there until the fire's crust is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound with tetrafarmacon ointment until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"And it was said that when the plague remains open, it's better to raise the arm for greater healing."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"And some of them said that the backbone should be cauterized inside the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of the spongy tissue of the bone is burnt."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"And then it should be scraped with something sharp to expose the burnt bone, and then it should be dressed [i.e., treated]."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end [of the bone], it should be pressed strongly onto the bone until it cracks, and this is the method of small alveoli:"
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"And they believe that from that place, the fumes of the head expire."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	"And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is consolidated [healed]."
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	"But I have not seen these two kinds of cautery performed on anyone, except in some cases out of fear; and therefore, it seems to me that it is better with health when it occurs. For the head is weakened by a solution of continuity from this cause, as we have witnessed in other members, and especially when the head of the sick person is feverish by nature."
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	"And the first kind of cautery seems to me to be safer and better. And that one, with that work, is good for health."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter according to [Matthew] xxviii, verse vi."
Del cauteri del cap.	"On cauterizing the head."
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	If chronic and prolonged pain occurs in the entire head of a patient, who uses various remedies such as ointments, poultices, and bandages, but finds no relief even after cautery treatment has been applied, then consider whether the patient's constitution is strong by nature. If the pain is not severe or troublesome, apply another cautery to alleviate it slightly.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	He burned him on the horn of his head with a hot iron cautery until the vein was severed.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Cut the vein and expose the quantity we have mentioned until it touches bone. Then cauterize it with a hot iron at the back of the head where it is called 'the vessel' — which is where a cupping glass is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	Also alleviate your hand in this manner and do not expose the bone because this cautery causes less pain than all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery should be applied in its place, for the cautery with which one burns the horns of the head and the back of the neck is more subtle than that used to burn the middle part of the head. This is how it is done.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Headings:
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Burning for old migraine
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is a sudden pain in the head, or it spreads into the ear, if medicines that relieve headaches are not effective and other treatments have been tried without success, then cauterization should be performed using either an acid cautery or a hot iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	To perform cauterization with an acidic cautery, take a pennyworth of salt and dissolve it in vinegar.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then make an incision with a sharp scalpel at the location of the pain on the temple, so that it is hidden under the hair.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Next, press on the wound with a clean cloth for several hours to prevent bleeding. Then remove the cloth after three hours and wipe away any remaining salt. Leave the wound uncovered for two or three days until it heals completely.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"Then also cure that wound within until it heals."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"And if you wish, do this: prepare some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise on burning medicines."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"The manner of cauterization with iron is as follows: ignite the cautery, of which this is the form:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"And it is called 'closed nails', for its head is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a slight prominence."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And then place [the cautery] on the location of the pain, and hold your hand steady so that the fire is not extinguished, and move the iron gently but quickly."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if the quantity of fire that is extinguished by the breath is equal to its size, raise your hand so that the artery is not extinguished, so that there may not come a flow of blood."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then dip it in saltwater and place it on the location, and leave it there for three days. Then apply a poultice with edges, and also treat it with an ointment until it is healed."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"And if you wish to cauterize the extremity of the wound according to the cautery method, be careful not to cut into an artery in this migraine properly not ancient."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Four."
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	"Of cauterization of an ancient migraine."
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	"When you are treating a migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and the divisions of illnesses, and it does not improve, and sometimes because the illness is such that it does not succumb to the first cauterization with medicine or fire cautery, then you must heat the cautery iron until it is red-hot. Then place your hand on the location of the pain with a line of length equal to half its width, or more if necessary; and pause for a while and press that upon the artery so that it enters into the bone."
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	"But it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is moved by mastication, and that the nerve is not burned nor the nerves that move it, and that there be no spasm."
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is opened, because there is fear in opening it, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studious nor experienced; leave the operation to him at the beginning."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	"And I will come with a reminder of the method of dealing with accidental blood flow from an artery according to its manner in its place in this book."
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And if you see this illness not abating after this cautery and you see the patient's condition tolerable, then cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the ulcer until it is healed."
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	"And if you wish to administer the cautery we have mentioned in the chapter on the division of an artery with cautery having two points, it is better and more efficient cauterization."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five."
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	"Of cauterization of ear pains."
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it is treated with laxatives and other methods mentioned in the division, but the pain persists, then heat the cautery, which is called 'puncta,' of which this is the shape:"
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	"And approximate the cautery to the ignition, and move it around the entire ear as if it were rolling, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in one."
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	"Go along with the cautery to the root of the ear little by little until you feel the location with your tent."
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	"And if the cautery is applied at ten points around the entire ear, then press it there and treat those locations until they are healed."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter Six."
De cauterizacio de turtura.	"Of cauterization of torticollis."
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	"Torticollis that is treated with cautery is only of the kinds that come from a vein, according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses."
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	"Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve."
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	"When you treat that type of tortoise with herbs and caperberries and garlic, and your treatment doesn't help, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of both lips."
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	"And place your cautery on the opposite side of where the wound appears, for healing occurs only where it seems healthy."
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	"And the method of cauterization is to cauterize with the cautery in the right corner at the tip of the ear, then above it a little on the horn of the head, and on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of your finger's thickness, and place your hand on the cautery until its heat has burned through half of the thickness of the skin."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	"And this is the shape of the cautery, which belongs to the barber-surgeon, whose shape appears before you on this table."
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	"But even more subtly is what you can see here; and sometimes it's better to cut away excess flesh rather than cauterize."
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	"And similarly treat the location with that which is presented before you until it heals."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	"Regarding the cauterization of ancient apoplexy."
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	"When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said but your treatment does not help and the patient has no fever, then cauterize them in four places: on all of their head's horns; and with a cautery at the middle of the head, as we have said; and cauterize behind the ear."
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	"And the manner of cauterization is made according to what has been said above."
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	"And it should also be cauterized on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more recent; and similarly treated with what you are doing."
Capitol .viii.	"Chapter VIII."
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	"Regarding cauterization for the removal of a stain."
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	"It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large jars and pills made from powdered myrrh."
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	Approach and shave the head of the patient completely, and place on the crown the plaster described in the treatise of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Place that one several times, for this is the method of cauterizing
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do thus according to the method already mentioned.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if it does not heal well like that, then do three cauterizations on the final part of their head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head to the lowest part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Between each cautery place the thickness of a finger, and promptly cover the cautery with what has been produced
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add and the illness is tolerating it, then do the cautery in the middle; and if you want more addition, then cauterize on both horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Cover that until it heals; and let the cauteries be olive-sized according to the shape given beforehand
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization for paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you are proceeding with moistening the head with herbs and water as we have said, and when you have shaved the head of the patient, then cauterize in this way: cauterize first on the middle of the head, and then cauterize on all the horns of the head, and cauterize on the final part of it, and make three cauteries on the spinal bones of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body that has persisted and the illnesses are tolerating and the illness is strong, then cauterize in this way: cauterize with four cauteries on the spinal bones of the back, and afterward cauterize on whatever point has been fought from the liver, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And promptly cover that until it heals; and let this be olive-sized cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization for epilepsy
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore it is necessary to moisturize the brain of him at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and is tolerating except for the exception of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer gargarisms and mastigators for moistening the brain before, for several days, with moderation of food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And promptly shave the head of the patient, and promptly cauterize in this way: with one cautery on the middle of the head according to the manner previously described, and with another cautery on the occupit of it, and on each horn of the head cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and is tolerating, then promptly cauterize in this way with cauteries as we have said, having paralysis and softening of the body on the spinal bones of the neck and the spinal bones of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be olive-sized cautery according to what has been stated previously.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause with subtle cauteries according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	"Chapter XI."
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	"On cauterizing melancholy."
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	"If the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries mentioned in the case of paralysis."
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	"And if the cause of melancholy is declining excess leading to it, and the body of the patient is humid, then they should drink what clears the brain according to what has been mentioned earlier in this section."
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	"Then shave the head of the patient, and properly make a poultice from crow's foot over its circumference, and also apply that poultice in the middle of the head."
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	"And let the patient sweat profusely, and be held down on all sides."
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	"Then apply a liniment poultice; afterwards, it is worth rubbing with sheep's fat."
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	"And warm that over the fire with gentle heat for as long as it endures."
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	"Then put that on the middle of the head in a circle and let the patient rest until they feel warmed."
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	"And do this with the patient once every week until the boil is healed; or if you wish, cauterize it making small punctures according to how large it is, but holding your hand thus arranged: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly."
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	"And then apply that poultice wrapped in linen cloth or wool grease."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter XII."
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	"On cauterizing descending water in the eye."
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	"When you have recognized the beginning of water in the eye through the signs that I have mentioned earlier in this section, then begin and give the patient to drink what clears the head, and keep him from all moisture."
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	"And let him/her sit in a bath of hot water for several days."
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	"And then command the patient to shave his/her head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries over both temples if there is an onset of water rising in both eyes, or on one side if it is just beginning in one eye."
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	"Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries that lie on the nape of the neck, and let the incisions be of this length in the latitude of the temples."
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	"And guard against fluxes of blood when cauterizing. And if you see blood flowing, stop it with some medication that is available to you."
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	"And I will come with knowledge for extracting arteries and for excising them and for cautioning against fluxes of blood."
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	"Sometimes it is cauterized on both sides of the neck between the two bones with two deeply productive cauteries."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII."
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	"On cauterizing old tears."
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	"When tears from the eyes are abundant and it is verified that this is superfluous fluid blood, then cauterize it with the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the beginning of water rising in the eyes, and also with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on either side of the temples, and with two cauteries on either side of the neck."
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	"And if you need to add more, then cauterize it also on both sides of the cheekbone at the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery."
Capitol .xiiii.	"Chapter XIV."
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	"On cauterizing foul breath from the nose."
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	"When you treat it with what we have said in this section and your treatment does not help, then prepare for him to drink the decoction of cochlearia plants for three nights; and also shave his head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized cautery made from olive oil."
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	"And also cauterize it with a clove cautery with two cauteries above the eyebrows on either side of the hair."
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	"And be careful not to incise the artery."
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	"And this is how you make the clove cautery:"
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV."
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	"For cauterization of softening eyelids."
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid becomes softened due to illness or humidity, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is how it is done:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	If you, cauterize that on both eyebrows with a small cautery in every part, and they are elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	"And do not press too hard on the cautery with your hand, but rather according to how much the third portion of the eyelid is adhered."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	"When the hairs on the edge of the eyelid become converted to parts within and stick out, cauterize the eyelid with a hot iron."
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	"When the hairs of the eyelid become converted into parts within so as to stick out the eyelid, cauterize them in either of two ways: either with a hot iron or with medicine that burns."
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	"If cauterizing with fire, command the patient beforehand that they let their eyelashes grow out as those who are to be plucked, until they are lengthened and hardened; and if any of them are stuck together at their roots, then afterwards you should bind the eyelids with a bandage so that they may not be harmed until the hairs have grown out."
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	"Therefore when they are grown out and hardened, then place the head of the patient on a table, raise up the eyelid of the eye to be cauterized with a probe, having made the probe like the shape of a leaf of a mulberry tree, and its beginning close to the hairs."
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	"And likewise place cotton dipped in alum or in mucus of snail on the eye."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And now ignite the cautery of which this is the form."
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	"And now cauterize the figure you have marked, little by little, in several viewings, until the surface of the sinew appears like a leaf of myrtle, entirely apparent."
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	"The sign of the health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the wound contract and its hairs rise up around the puncture."
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	"And then lift your hand away and leave it alone for three days. And afterwards pause on the wound's edge until the scar has healed."
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"Then heal it with unguent until it is healed."
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	"But if the hairs return for some reason and the eyelid becomes softened again, then perform the cautery once more just as you did initially."
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	"But if the hairs do not remain on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and covered over so that the hairs do not again touch the wound."
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"But when performing cautery with medicine that burns, command the patient to raise their eyelashes until they are extended and covered over. And afterwards a bandage of cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf should be made."
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	"And then take some known soap and live wax melted together. And quickly mix those ingredients well and make haste so that it does not cool down. And afterwards spread that over the cloth which was made in the shape of a myrtle leaf and place that on one eyelid or both. And leave the wound's edge wrapped in egg white, and the patient's head should be elevated."
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	"And leave your finger on the medicine and press it gently without moving it until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like that of fire."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	"And when you perceive that the burning sensation has ceased, then remove the medicine and wipe it away with your little finger. And when the burning sensation ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and then examine whether the eyelid is already raised as if it were washed by the contraction with fire or incision, for this is often the case. And if not, apply more of the medicine to the place where the medicine has not yet taken effect until it becomes covered over and your operation is completed."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	"And then place on the wound's edge with a border so that it seals the seam of the adhesion. And then dress it with antiseptic or another suitable dressing until it is healed."
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	"And if you perform this operation, it is necessary that with vigilant diligence you ensure that no debris of the medicine falls into the wound. And if the eyelid becomes inflamed after several days and some cause of the hairs touches the wound, then reapply your medicine to that place on the eyelid which is inflamed. And do so just as you did at the beginning, until it heals."
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf."
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"And know that the wounds of men are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your cautery should be adapted accordingly."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"And this secret of correct practice shall not be concealed from anyone who studies in this art."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	"Of the cautery of a fistula that is in the lachrymal gland of the eye."
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on illnesses, and your treatment does not confirm, then you must cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place their head on their own knees, and hold their head between their thighs by some servant in such a way that it is neither moved nor agitated with its head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place cotton soaked in alum or wool on the opening of the boil or on gauze over the wound.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cauterizing iron, which is shaped like this:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which has been heated, so that it is hot at its tip where the cauterization is performed.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it can be penetrating into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want it to come out like this:
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	"But that which is concave is better for your task."
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	"And promptly press the fistula if it's open, and remove from it the dirty and wet one."
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	"If it has not been opened, then open it and remove the pus from it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	"And pause the cautery over it which has been ignited; take your hand with a little caution, and bring the cautery of the wound to the opening of the nose so that neither you nor the patient is disturbed. Then place the cautery in the wound and burn it there."
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	"If at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed; and leave it like this for three days. Then pause over the spot with a border and surround it with drying ointment until it heals."
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	"But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine over it until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is appropriate in its chapter."
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	"And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula which some first said: Enter into the location of the fistula and fill it with that subtle camphor of which it has the form; and melt in that amount of melted lead equal to one inch; then take your hand with careful retention, so that the melted lead does not reach the wound of the patient; and cover the spot on the skin where you inserted it with albumen of egg or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing."
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to administer a tractive agent for the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to what will come in its proper place."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	"On the cauterization of the opening of the ears."
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	"Many times it happens that fissures appear in the lips, and more often in the lips of children."
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	"Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the sections and your treatment does not improve, then apply a small cautery iron according to this form that is shown:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	"And let its concavity be according to the subtlety of a needle."
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	"Apply that iron carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures."
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with cerote until it is healed."
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	"On the cauterization of fistula in the mouth."
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"When an abscess appears in the uvula or palate or roots of teeth and it becomes inflamed, then bursts open, and becomes infected, and pus comes out and a fistula is formed, if you treat it and your treatment does not improve, then you should kindle cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and melt that heated iron into the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the heated iron reaches the depth of it, and repeat this once or twice; and then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it is healed."
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	"And then if the inflammation is cut off and it is healed, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to discover the location and remove the rotted bone according to what will come in its chapter."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter XX."
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	"For cauterization of the teeth and softening of the veins."
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	"When veins are softened by humidity and teeth are painful, if you cure them with medicines without success, then place the patient's head on your thigh, and bring the cautery in this shape near, so that you place the cup over the tooth and quickly insert the cautery into it. Remove your hand a little bit so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth."
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	"And then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want."
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	"Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, because the painful tooth is hardened and the softened gum is strengthened and the humidity is dried."
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	**On Toothache Cauterization**
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When toothache is caused by coldness or worm within, or medicine does not help the cure, then cauterize it with one of two methods: either cautery with cow's dung or cautery with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	To cauterize with cow's dung: Take some cow's dung and boil it in a pot of iron. Then take some cotton, wrap it around the tip of the toothpick, dip that into the boiled cow's dung, and quickly apply it to the painful tooth before it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip some wool or cotton into the aforementioned cow's dung, place it on the painful tooth, and then quickly apply a red-hot iron onto it until the iron reaches the crown of the tooth's concavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But cauterizing with fire is that you wait for the coal or iron to become red-hot and glowing, and then carefully apply it onto the tooth without touching the inside of the mouth of the sick person.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then shape the coal or iron as you wish and apply it to the tooth, keeping your hand away until it cools down. Repeat this several times until the pain is gone, either on that same day or the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary that after this cautery, the sick person keeps their mouth closed tightly on both sides and holds it like that for an hour, and then spits it out. This is the form of cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize in whatever way you wish, according to what you are capable of doing.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is how the cautery should be performed:
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter 22."
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	"Regarding the cauterization of extroflexed organs."
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When extroflexion is due to phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion despite medications, and you want to induce digestion slightly, then take a hot cautery of this shape (illustration follows), having two extremities opened so that the smoke may escape through one extremity while pausing the other ignited extremity over the swelling once or several times until it reaches the center of the swelling.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the swelling is small, then pause the cautery according to its quantity, and leave it for three days, pausing over the wound's edge until what the fire has burned is removed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then dress that wound with ointments, bandages, and cloths until it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery is to be conveyed thus:
Capitol .xxiii.	Here is the illustration of the cautery:
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	"For cauterization of vocal cords and constriction of breath."
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	"When humidity comes upon the channel of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by coldness of temperament, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at first with laxative medicines, and afterwards cauterize that place behind the uvula in the depressed region."
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	"And be careful not to burn the uvula or scar the throat with the cautery, but only slightly touch it."
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	"Cauterize that area with another cautery behind the junction of the neck at the last cervical vertebra."
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	"And the cautery should be applied thus according to the manner previously described."
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat it with what has been mentioned above until it is healed."
Capitol .xxiiii.	"Chapter XXIV."
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	"For cauterization of lung disease and cough."
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	"When cough and lung disease are due to humid coldness, and the patient has no fever or spitting, nor is it an ancient illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed locations of the throat and lungs; and apply another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be applied thus according to the form previously described."
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	"And if you wish, the cauterization may also be performed by puncture with the cautery called a punctum, which has been described previously in the puncture of earache."
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"And let them be punctured thus. And then treat it with what you mentioned above until it is healed."
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cautery does not have three branches, then cauterization can be performed thus: with one application you can make three cauteries according to this form:"
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	"For cauterization of tittillation, which is the head of the helper (i.e., the penis)."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	"When the head of the helper is dislocated due to humid slippery moisture and does not remain firm at the time of its return, then reduce the dislocation thus until it is in its usual position for returning, and apply pressure through a slight movement so that it returns thus as it should be, just as we have testified. Then first reduce the dislocation, and apply pressure on the back of the penis or on its side; and raise the scrotum which is at the lower part of the testicles to the upper parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated downwards."
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"Then cauterize the scrotum until it penetrates into that side; and here comes the figure of cauterization with four cauteries."
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And do it thus subtly according to the quantity of the tent; this is its form:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"And sometimes it is adjusted thus, and therefore there are eight cauteries."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"And then pause on the cautery for several days with salt water, and let the illness adhere thus quietly, so that the member is not moved for some time until it is comforted."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	"And if the dislocation is upwards and it happens thus, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or several punctiform cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is dissipated, and the illness is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter XXVI."
De cauterizacio del stomac.	"For cauterization of the stomach."
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	"When there is friction and much humidity in the stomach such that it is extracted from its completeness and becomes multiplied with pain, if you continue the methods of treatment without relieving it, then let the illness be raised on its back, extend its hands and feet, and cauterize it thus: with one cautery on the left side of the pit of the stomach for the quantity of a finger's width with a claw-shaped cautery, and with two cauteries on either side of the middle of the cautery until you get the figure of a triangular cautery; and lengthen those which are not adjusted so that they cause purgation."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	"And if the depth of the cautery is equal to two-thirds of the thickness of the scrotum."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cautery according to the circular form thus:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And the stomach should be punctured according to that which is frightened by this cautery: and you should prick the stomach thus with a tentacle as much as you wish, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment which is preceding until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"For cauterization of the fatty liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive flatulence such that it is thrown from its normal completeness by excessive evacuation, and if the illness is cured with what we have said without being relieved, then let the illness be raised on its back over the neck of the liver, and prick with a tentacle three cauteries thus and thus quantity meters thus on the liver to the left of the hypochondria, where the decubitus of a man is."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And let the space which is between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right forearm."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"And do not press too much with the cautery."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the quantity of that which is adhered to is equal to the thickness of a finger's width, and it is not adjusted there; then if the illness stands on its feet; but if it does not stand, let it be seated, having previously extended its legs, and raise its arms."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"And be careful that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the scrotum adhere completely so that all of the body is adhered to and it may penetrate into the bowels, because the scrotum here is subtle; know this."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	"For perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	"When an excavation or abscess appears in the liver and you wish to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the illness will be heavy and painful without sharpness."
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	"And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then the pain will be sharp and intense, and sometimes the physicians are tired from its treatment."
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	"Therefore let the illness be turned on its back and prick the location of the abscess with a tentacle and then ignite the cautery which resembles a crowbar, the form of which has been preceded in the other page."
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	"And cauterize with that cautery until all of the scrotum is covered and it has penetrated to the diaphragm and it has become healthy like embers."
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat it with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed."
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	"But it is not necessary that this form of cautery be used except by someone whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged and who has experienced many illnesses. But even with experience sometimes it can be harmful to perform this operation; nevertheless we leave it to those who know better; it is better."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	"For cauterization of pleurisy."
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	"The ancients said that cauteries of the roots of arthritis are applied to pleurisy in this manner: and this is that you should take from the dry roots of long arthritis one sharp spike which is found, and it should be as thick as a finger."
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Approximately translates to:
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	"You need not take your hand off the cautery during the operation."
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	"Ancient authors have said that this is the cautery of men which they use like a ray and ignite it in that place which is between the ribs, until it reaches that aposteme and becomes clean and healthy, as we have said about the aposteme of the liver."
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	"There is no fear in this perforation with cautery, for it happens suddenly in the location of the fistula which does not heal."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX"
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	"On cauterizing the liver."
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	"When you treat the disease of the liver with what we have said about its cure in the division, and if your treatment does not succeed, then cauterize it there in three ways, all of which are correct. The first way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the liver according to its figure, as shown previously."
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	"And the thickness of each cautery should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of cauterizing should be as we have said for the cautery of the liver."
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	"And do not press your hand with the cautery. And let the disease be on its surface."
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	"And another method of cauterizing is to heat the cautery over two wicks, which causes us to mention in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle and elevate the chain that is located near the left side where the patient lies."
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	"And lift your elevation so as to raise the chain along the length of the body, in order that cauterizations may be made according to the width of the body."
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	"And then introduce the two wicks, already lit, into that space where those wicks entered from the other side."
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	"Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are made."
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three wicks."
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	"Then care for the cautery because it has left to give heat for too many days, since it is more effective than other causes precedent in the cure."
Capitol .xxxi.	"**Chapter XXIX**."
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	"Regarding the cautery of dropsy."
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	"No cauteries are applied in dropsy except for certain instances specifically."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	"When you treat dropsy with the methods of treatment mentioned in this section and do not cure it, then cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the shoulder blades, one on the right side of the buttocks, and another on the stomach."
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	"And the depth of the cauteries should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin."
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	"And remove the cautery quickly so that it does not burn for too long."
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	"And do not evacuate the disease from treatment immediately after cauterizing, but wait for two days to allow for healing with the help of nature."
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be club-shaped according to its previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its previous form."
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	"Of cauterization of the feet and the thighs."
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen in dropsy and filled with water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot near where the auricular and annular bones meet, lift your hand up with the cautery but do not twist it; then lift your hand up again, but do not return that same one entirely, for salt water will remain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Here is how you use the cautery in this manner:
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	"Apply cauteries along the length of the affected area, placing one below the navel and another at the midpoint of the area; use two cauteries on each side."
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	"And let the wound remain open during treatment for some time so that no fluid accumulates in it."
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	"And then treat the same wounds as those we have mentioned above."
Capitol .xxxiii.	"Chapter XXXIII"
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	"Regarding the cautery of abdominal wounds."
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	"When the abdomen is inflamed and humid internally such that it weakens the vital forces, then the digestive and retentive powers are weakened in the stomach and intestines. This is cured with remedies appropriate for this condition, without mentioning them here, and sometimes a cautery of the vital force is exhibited. Therefore cauterize above the stomach as previously described in the cautery of the stomach, using a round cautery and four small ones around the navel, using a pointed cautery; also cauterize on the bladder over the hip bone with one or two cauteries."
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	"And if there is an abundance of humidities and the condition tolerates it, then cauterize above the pubis and on the intestines, strongly applying two cauteries near the stomach and close to the groin, for this is a perfect cure that will not fail."
Capitol .xxxiv.	"Chapter XXXIV"
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	"Regarding the cauterization of old hemorrhoids."
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	"When there are many old hemorrhoids or one of large size rubbed against by rough humors or corrupted moistures, and they are cured as we have said in the division without conferring their cure, then cauterize them with three cauteries on each side of the pubis below the small triangular bone, and place another cautery above the navel going down two fingers."
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	"If it is believed that the stomach of the patient is cold and their food undigested, and their face often discolored with spots, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as mentioned before; and apply one cautery to the liver, and another cautery to the spleen using a pointed cautery, leaving it there for some time until the wound is healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	"For cautery of haemorrhoids, especially for their removal."
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you remove the haemorrhoid, immediately apply the cautery that is attached to the ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	After placing the hot iron on that removed haemorrhoid, close it tight so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, because if there are too many haemorrhoids, cauterize each one separately as explained earlier, and afterwards treat them with what you consider suitable for their healing.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	But if you cauterize with a large cautery over several [haemorrhoids], it will cause more harm than good.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the parts near the anus
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	If nature does not obey the work recommended earlier and the patient is distressed by this, it should be healed with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is some fistula near the anus that has been there for a long time and is filled with corrupt matter and moisture, it is more appropriate to heal it by inserting a fine probe into it and then ascertaining its depth with the aforementioned probe.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery which resembles a needle-red-hot.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that heated cautery into this fistula, going in as far as the probe entered.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"Iron the cautery on those corrupted bodies once or twice or thrice according to your necessity."
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	"Be careful not to burn nerves and veins; if the fistula is on the bladder or intestine wall, then be cautious about all these areas; do this only when the fistula is in a fatty location and you think it's not penetrating."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"And afterwards dress the wound so that it may heal."
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	"And if the wound is sealed, and its contents have been removed, and it remains thus for some time, know then that it has healed completely."
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	"And if the contents are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the bone of the bone that is corrupted, or this happens due to those causes which will be remembered in its place."
Capitol .xxxvii.	"Chapter XXXVII"
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	"On the cautery of warts."
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	"When pain in the nostrils is caused by friction or thick windiness, and because of this the patient's heart is afflicted, it is then necessary to cauterize there with a pointed cautery on each nostril using a cautery with sharp points, of which the memory remains."
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	"And after cauterizing there with the second one, place it aside, so that three cauteries of a linear shape come out, and then put them aside in order."
Capitol .xxxviii.	"Chapter thirty-eight."
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	"On the cautery of the bladder."
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	"When there is debility and softness in the bladder due to friction and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize on the dividing line below the navel where the pubic hairs begin, cauterizing with a cautery on the right side and another on the left."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	"And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of hair on the pubis; and cauterize there with a cautery at the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary."
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	"And let the cautery be pointed, according to what is appropriate."
Capitol .xxxix.	"Chapter thirty-nine."
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	"On the cautery of the womb."
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	"When there is friction and humidity in the womb which prevents pregnancy, corrupts menstruation, delays its onset, and causes pain during menses, then it is necessary to cauterize the area around the navel with three cauteries, as we have described for the bladder cautery. Also cauterize the area below the back where the pubic hairs begin, using a pointed cautery."
Capitol .xl.	"Chapter forty."
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	"On the cautery of dislocation of the ankle."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	"When moist humors have flowed into the ankle region and are the cause of its dislocation, a sign of which is that one bone appears longer than the other when compared together."
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	The place of dislocation is found on his right hip.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you must cauterize the patient around the opening of the hernia with a round iron cautery, because once you have felt with your finger in the circumference of the opening as it turns, and thus that the opening falls to the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And here is the cautery previously mentioned for the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three olive-sized round cauteries.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And let the cautery be made according to the amount of heat of all the cord, and then carefully heal that part which has been burned.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain arises from the opening of a hernia, and its cause is friction and moisture, the patient is cured with what we have said earlier and not otherwise, then you must release the patient from thick humors with pills made from fetid or artificial substances or similar ones; and then cauterize that part.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterizing that part is done in two ways: either with cauteries using burning medicines or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	Choose one of two known methods: the first is to cauterize that part over the opening of the hernia with three triangular cauteries in this shape, and make them of good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, if the cauteries are olive-sized or larger.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But sometimes it may happen that the cauteries are placed over the middle point above the head of the hernia, so there will be four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, you can cauterize with a circle whose shape is the same as in the cauterization of dislocation of a hernia. Let it be a continuous circle that burns the heat of all the cord.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterizing sciatica when pain adheres to the hernia and does not extend into the groin.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it extends into the groin, then cauterize that area with two cauteries over the groin above the point where you feel the pain; and one cautery over the knee, about four fingers' breadth down from the left side of that part.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if using a cautery knife, let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the cord.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the pain extends to the area near the left groin, then cauterize there where you feel it with three or four cauteries or more as needed.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the pain seems to be beneath the groin, then cauterize that area with one cautery knife.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And be careful in all cauterizations not to end with the cautery burning nerves or large arteries, lest you cause harm or contraction to the affected part.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some of those who cauterized over the knee and ended up injuring nerves during the procedure, causing the leg to swell, with tumors reaching up to the thigh. The flesh became inflamed, putrefied, and the whole leg was corrupted.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And thus happens a frequent complication of abdominal surgery, often leading to death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one separately according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	The wise have said in the cauterization of hernia that the cautery should be shaped like an iron ring whose circumference is about that of a handspan. And let it be placed somewhat down from its own opening, according to the thickness of a finger bone or less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within that circle let there be another third one; and let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a pulse; and let those circles be open at two parts; and let their length be about one or two pulses, and make in those edges decently sharpened iron margins within the circles. This is its shape:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"A large fire should be kindled until it glows and sparks, then placed over the patient's buttocks, with the patient lying on their side."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And therefore cauterize that area three times in one visit."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And so leave it alone for three days; plaster that area with a border and let the wound remain open too long; and treat that area with egg whites until it is healed."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Son of mine, regarding this type of cauterization, we have not used it much because of the fear of causing injury to it, and because few cases have been found where it is applied."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"Perhaps from those cauterizations on him who suffered them, you will find one in that area."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"However, cauterization with adherent medicines is to be done by making two circles with a needle perforated in the center through which the hot iron of the door can pass; let the thickness of the wall between them be two nuts or such."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And if the space which is between each one has the quantity of thickness of a finger; and let them be open below and above, and let them contain themselves between them according to this shape:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And then place yourself on the side of the thigh where the illness lies and put your hand on the edge of the thigh; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and let its quality be with the fire little by little, and hold it for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the illness to bite and adhere itself — for that finds biting thus as if from fire — until the biting ceases."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And then lift your hand with the instrument and cleanse all the hot water from the thigh with sweet water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"Then leave him for three days and pause on that side where the blackness of the boil is removed, and leave it for a few days, then it will discharge."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat this wound until it heals."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"If the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, make him sit in warm water, as it is done for equine colic."
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"And this is the method of cold water, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medicines."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	"Take equal parts of alkali and unslaked lime, grind them together, and place them in a new earthenware pot with a small hole made in its bottom according to the amount that enters the ray."
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	"And place another pot upside down on top of the earthenware pot and pour into it sweetened water containing live alkali and lime, which covers those below by about one finger. Then press those below gently but firmly with your hand and leave the hole that allows the sharp water to pass through from the earthenware pot into the inverted pot."
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	"And collect all that water and pour it over fresh live lime and other new alkali, because at this hour it will have become very sharp. This water is used in many medical operations and for cauterization of other limbs, as it has a burning effect."
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	"And this is how some medicines are prepared with which one cauterizes the skin, such as those made from pitch and resin mixed together, and lime with soap."
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"And Galen recounts an operation and cure by which sciatica and hip joint pain were healed in someone from the past. He highly praises this treatment, saying that no other cure is needed for it, as it heals with just one application, just as Galen recounts."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	"And if you cannot obtain verdigris, then take fresh figs; grind them well with a little niter and apply them to the water in which there is pain, or on the joint itself, or on the muscle, and bind it."
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	"And let it be left for three hours or for as long as the patient feels relief from the pain."
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	"And then take that person into a bath and wash their body thoroughly until the pain ceases and they are healed."
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	"And know that one should not use cautery with these medicines, but only the evacuation of the body."
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	"However, Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with a goat's-horn cautery, it works very well. And here is how one should do this cautery: Take wool and dip it in old oil, and apply it between the thumb and index finger."
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	"And then take a dry goat's horn and heat it on the fire until it becomes hot. Then apply it to the wool and leave it there until it has spread."
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	"And repeat this process until you feel the sensation of the cautery reach the hip joint and then stop when the pain has ceased."
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	"And this method of cautery is called 'ox-cautery'."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	"On the cauterization of toothache."
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	"Sometimes pain in the back is caused by several reasons, such as by fracture or blow or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, by infusion of hot and humid matter."
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	"And cautery is useful only in this single case, which occurs from the effusion of hot matter."
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	"Therefore, it is appropriate to evacuate the pain with pills made from feverfew and similar herbs, which should be made on the back where there is pain, three lines long according to its width, placing two or more cauteries in each line, depending on the amount of tolerance to pain and the strength of the person."
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	"And cautery should be done with a pointed cautery."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries with a round-tipped cautery in this manner:"
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"On the cauterization of the beginning of dropsy."
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	"Very often this illness occurs in young children; the sign of its beginning in children is that they suddenly become short of breath and have difficulty moving."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	"And you will find it in the lowest thoracic vertebrae of the back, and on the ribs that are beginning to stick out above the others."
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And therefore, when you see this and wish to prohibit it, at once cauterize there with a circular cautery in this manner:"
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	"That the cautery should take up all of one side of the vertebra evenly."
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines long."
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	"And let the points be close together."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	"And then treat the spot until it is healed with what we have said."
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	"But be careful not to administer cautery in dropsy that is caused by spasm of nerves."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	"Of cautery for gout and joint pain."
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	"When joint pain is caused by bad humors that are stuck in each member of the body, therefore when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout properly."
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	"And thus how is gout caused by friction cured with a manner of cure and yet the pains are not removed, therefore cautery is used."
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	"And you cauterize there for appropriate evacuation in the circuit of the ankle joint with hot cauteries."
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And this is the form of the olive cautery used:"
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	"If it is necessary to make points on the skin of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery."
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	"If pains occur within the joints or elsewhere, and this happens often, then cauterize that area with three or four cauteries in total using this olive-oil cautery."
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	"If you need more cauteries than these, then heat them up first without touching them directly with the cautery."
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	"If pains occur in both joints, then apply the cautery as described in its chapter."
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	"If pains occur only on one side and are called 'sucking', then make punctures around the muscles like this: puncture in those two lines."
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	"If pains remain in these places, then make punctures around the muscles on each nodule and on the palm of the hand."
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	"If pains occur near the joints of the fingers or toes, cauterize each of all the tendons in that area."
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	"And do not neglect the treatment and receipt of medicines for this illness, because if good regimen and evacuation are done with this cautery alone without other medicines, God willing, it will heal."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter 45."
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	"On cauterization of fractures."
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	"When there is a fracture in the ankles or shins causing swelling before the thigh at the beginning of the injury, then you should order the patient to abstain from food on that day and use gentle laxatives so that the swelling in his abdomen may subside."
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	"And then place the patient between your thighs with his back facing you, and order him to keep his knee bent until the swelling is completely gone or appears."
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	"And then return him with his back facing you again and find the fracture on the bone of the knee joint, signaling the end of it like the middle of a circle."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then ignite the cautery which is made in this shape:"
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Within there may be much heat and throwing of sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then carefully reduce the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over it so that it does not slip out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, who holds their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that same sign with your right hand, and push this intestine with the tip of the knife into the middle of the abdomen; repeat this procedure again if you have not yet succeeded in doing so.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the sensation of the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn it and cause harm to the patient or bring about death.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that if with the cautery you do not seize the intestine, your operation will be futile.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be thin according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then take care of the burn wound for three days by applying a compress with clean water so that it may heal quickly.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat him with other remedies until he is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should remain in bed for forty days until the wound and inflammation are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is necessary that the patient's nutrition be restricted according to the length of time for his healing, so that the intestines do not prolapse due to the effort of recovering.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time to get up after about forty days, then administer food gradually and carefully, keeping him in bed for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should be spared from work and excessive eating and drinking, and loud talking, for if one uses this method of healing entirely without moderation, it will not bring about a cure.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And now I will discuss the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and if it happens that they are not detected immediately, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and apply water as has been said. And treat him with the same care as mentioned above.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some early writers have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape, for it is marked with an indentation:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"And it is placed a line that goes for the width on the side above the rupture, and another line above; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter Forty-six."
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"On cauterizing a hemorrhoid."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in the limbs due to congestion or percussion and persists for a long time without being relieved by medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be applied to every limb according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, location of the twist and intensity of pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if the first cautery heals it, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery; for it is customary with those pains to be punctured in the limb that approaches the affected area, so that you must reach those with the cautery until the illness is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVI
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Some people view leprosy as benefited by cautery, but there is little improvement if the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and treat it according to what has been said in its division. Do not delay if this is present, and fear that corruption will spread throughout the whole body and entire complexion of the patient. Then cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another near it towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and both on the two horns; and one behind, on the nape or servant's mark.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And lastly, press the cauteries slightly into the bone to leave a small impression and remove the scabs, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from it. And cauterize on the chest as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade of the neck, and six cauteries on each shoulder blade of the back, and one large one over the shoulder blades near the nape, and one over the nape itself, and two over the ankles, and one over each ankle, and two over the knees and one over each knee, and two over the elbows, and two over the wrists; and cauterize him over all the joints of those limbs and feet, and over each heel of his feet, and over the fleshy parts of his legs.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And beware of the nerves which are on the heel that you do not burn them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater is the benefit and efficacy. And know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery, as they do with their own sores, because the body of the sufferer has become numb.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the limbs and joints as specified in the descriptions of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, cure the cautery with powdered earth mixed with honey, and with the other remedy until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Capítulo .xlviii.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Chapter XLVIII: Cauterization for Stupor
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When any limb is paralyzed or asleep and is treated with medications, oils, and poultices, but does not heal, then you should cauterize that paralyzed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter a little into the thickness of the flesh
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes it is cauterized some paralysis which extends to the arms and legs, and to the shoulder blades of the back and through the movement of the nerves which cause that limb to be paralyzed, and the paralysis is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But let not anyone presume to do this except one who is skilled in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the whole body that moves.
Capitol .xlix.	Capítulo .xlix.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Chapter XLIX: Cauterization for Morphea (scleroderma)
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When morphea is old and does not respond to any medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a hot cautery a little according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh until the whiteness and color are removed and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And afterwards, cure it with powdered earth and lentils mixed with olive oil and with leaves of mallows, and with pigeon blood or hen blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and afterwards a cloth should be placed on it and left to rest until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Capítulo L.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Chapter L: Cauterization for Cancer
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a round cautery around its circumference just as it is encircled.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise ones said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it. But I have not seen this, because I fear that it might become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen sometimes.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	It is more fitting that it be cauterized around its circumference using such a circle as we have described, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Capítulo .li.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	De la cauterización de una herida.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	"When a beard is slow to grow due to superfluous fat, the state of illness, or old age accompanied by lack of blood, and you wish to hasten its growth."
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	"However if you want to perform the operation using a cautery, here is its shape and how it should be applied."
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And when cauterizing in that place, let the arm be elevated so that its blood circulation is relieved; afterwards dress it until it heals."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter 52."
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	"On cauterization of a wound."
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"A wound is corruption moving through the limb which consumes it like dry wood being consumed by fire."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	"Therefore if you find a wound that can withstand cauterization with fire, heat some small and large iron nails according to what is appropriate for the location of the wound."
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	"And then cauterize it thoroughly so that you eradicate all corruption and leave no cause for further decay."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	"And then let it rest for three days, and afterwards dress the cauterized areas only with oil mixed with honey so that all scars are eradicated and all corruption is eliminated."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	"And then treat it with fresh, living flesh."
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	"But if after three days you find that flesh has grown healthy and without corruption, good. But if not, then repeat the cauterization over what remains of the corrupted areas."
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	"And wounds are sometimes treated with sharp medicine instead of cautery, as this is considered to be halfway between cautery and bandaging."
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	"However, cauterization with fire provides the most immediate benefit."
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	"And I have already discussed the treatment of wounds using sharp medicine in another section, so you may refer to that when you begin treatment."
Capitol .liii.	"Chapter 53."
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	"On cauterization of closed wounds and similar ones."
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	"Many times in wounds caused by blows with a heavy, blunt weapon that penetrates the flesh and causes injury, there are two ways to cauterize them: cautery with fire and cautery with boiling water."
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	"But cauterization with fire involves heating the cautery tongs like those used for branding poultry, which should be made of iron according to the size of the wound and have thin jaws."
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	"And then place the heated tongs on the wound and rotate your hand with the cautery around the edge of the wound until it reaches its full depth."
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	"And leave it for three days until flesh begins to grow."
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	"And then apply a plaster of wild mallows mixed with salt and leave it on overnight because it will eradicate all inflammation."
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the area with fresh, living flesh until it is healed."
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	"And if it has not yet converted, and sometimes this happens on the surface of the body, especially on the breasts and thighs, then you must cauterize those areas with boiling water. And this is done by taking a funnel made of brass or iron or branding tongs and placing it over the wound. Then fill the funnel with a small amount of boiling water and hold your hand steady while pressing the edge of the funnel firmly against the edge of the wound, allowing the boiling water to flow into the center of the wound. Let the wound experience the bite of the boiling water for about an hour, then remove the funnel, because the wound along with its inflammation will be eradicated."
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	"And do this with those until all of them on the body have been done."
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	"And then treat those wounds where the inflammation has been eradicated with ointments that cause flesh to grow."
Capitol .liiii.	"Chapter 54."
De cauterizacio de tremor.	"On cauterization of trembling (tremor)."
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	"When trembling occurs due to friction in the nerves or fever caused by heat or similar cause, then you should cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra. And also cauterize the foot and stomach area."
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	"And if trembling ceases, it will hasten recovery from the feverish illness."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter 55."
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	"On cauterization of accidental wounds to the body."
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	"When the body has been wounded accidentally and there are pustules filled with corrupted matter, then at the beginning when it appears, the head of the fistula should be cauterized with a fine cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated in the fire; or with a long, narrow cautery; or with a lenticular cautery."
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	"And sometimes it is also cauterized at the beginning of its discharge according to this method; and they are not believed, and the excess fluid is disrupted causing them to heal."
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	"But however, it should be done near evacuation with phlebotomy."
Capitol lvi.	"Chapter 56."
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	"On cauterization of accidental bleeding from a vein by incision with an axe."
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	"Sometimes bleeding occurs from an artery that is cut due to a blow or due to the incision of an aposteme or cautery on a limb, and then it seems difficult to stop."
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	"Therefore, when this happens to someone, then quickly press your hand over the opening of the artery and hold it there until the bleeding stops from beneath your finger and does not seep."
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	"And then place olive-shaped cauteries of various sizes in the fire by the hundreds, and blow on them until they are very hot."
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	"And then quickly take one of those cauteries, either small or large according to the place and size where the artery was broken, and apply it firmly to that vein as soon as you have removed your finger, so that it may be sealed and stop the bleeding."
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	"And if blood continues to flow from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then quickly take another cautery that has been prepared in the fire and do not stop doing so until the bleeding stops."
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	"But be careful not to burn the nearby nerves, lest you bring about some other harm."
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	"And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those except by one of four methods: either with cautery as mentioned above, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted (because then its extremities are burned and the bleeding stops), or by tying it tightly with flax or linen, or by applying medicines whose virtue is to restrict blood flow. And they should be strengthened with a compress and proper binding."
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	"But whoever administers proper restriction of it with flax or linen by tying tightly or by positioning causes burning and similar things, does nothing but harm."
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	"But if something like this happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor any medicine, then apply pressure with your index finger on the opening of that vein as mentioned above, and understand the great constriction of its entrance where the blood is prevented from flowing through its main channel. And do not remove your finger from the artery, and sprinkle over it cold water repeatedly until the blood becomes congealed and thickened. And see if there is a need for cautery or medicine."
Comensa la segonda partida.	"Begin the second part."
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	"Of incisions and piercings and cuppings and of bloodletting and of plague-like illnesses."
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	"This is an excerpt from Al-Bukhari's words."
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	"We have already discussed in the first chapter all diseases in which cautery with fire is beneficial and necessary with medication, and their causes and occasions, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of cauteries. We have also arranged the chapters on the supremacy of the head over the feet."
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	"And we will proceed in this chapter in the same manner so that whoever seeks this may find it easily upon asking."
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	"First, know that this chapter is about cautery with fire, which is in the first chapter of cauterization."
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	"And it is necessary that great caution be taken in the operations discussed in this chapter, for many lives are lost due to incorrect evacuation using blood with which life resides. Cautery of the vein or incision over the aposteme or opening of fistulas or purification of ulcers or extraction of arrows or incision of stones and their like."
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	"And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases death ensues."
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	"And we advise you not to fall into that which is doubtful, for sometimes people die from a few movements and mannerisms of diseases."
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	"And among them are some whose death is quick and easy due to the severity of their disease, its duration, and fear which means death."
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	"And among them are those who give you their wealth and sayings while you wait for their healing, but their disease is fatal."
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	"And therefore do not consent to those who come to you with this manner, and let your caution be greater than greed and your avarice. Do not presume upon any cause except certain science that proves it, and by which a praiseworthy outcome is achieved."
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	"And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all your diseases to turn them into health, for in this lies help for you to acquire fame and memory, praise and glory."
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	"O, my sons, may God inspire your understanding and not take away direction and protection from you, for this is in His hand."
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	"And I have arranged this chapter distinctly into chapters according to what has been stated in the chapter on cautery, so that it may be easier for you to understand what you seek and need."
Capitol primier.	"Chapter One."
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	"Concerning the treatment of water contained within the head of children."
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	"You should know that this disease often occurs in children during childbirth when the midwife squeezes the baby's head without lividity."
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	"And sometimes it occurs for unknown reasons which are not understood."
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	"But I have never seen this disease except in children; and out of all those whom I saw, none survived, and therefore it seemed to me to be a hopeless condition."
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	"And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and its head swelled so greatly that it could not lie on its back due to the size of its head, and more moisture increased until death ensued."
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	"And this humidity is either collected between the fontanelle and the bone, or it collects above the bone on the forehead."
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	"For if the operation is performed when the humidity is between the fontanelle and the bone and the swelling is small, you should cut into the middle of the head with an incision in the width of two fingerbreadths so that it runs along the direction of the humidity. This is the form of the spatula:"
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"And therefore if the humidity has increased more and the swelling is greater, then there are two incisions in this manner:"
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	"And if the humidity is above the bone, a sign of this is that you find the temples of the head open and free from any swelling, and the water is squeezed out when you press on them with your hand between the parts. This should not be concealed from you."
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"You should cut into the middle of the head with three incisions in this manner:"
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"And promptly remove all the humidity through the incision; and then press the incisions with cloths and feathers; and on the fifth day, apply wine and oil above it. And then remove the bandages and cleanse the wound with tenths and eggs, and press the head evenly. And feed the patient dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed."
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	"And there is another manner of incision which you should consider according to the magnitude of the swelling and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the back of the head, or on the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side. Therefore attend with your incision where the swelling and the accumulation of water appear, and do what seems best to you."
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	"And observe that you do not cut the artery, for if it happens that blood flows abundantly and the disease persists due to that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
Capitol .ii.	"Chapter Two."
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	"Concerning the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hilasseysse."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter Two."
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	"When there occurs a cataract or ulceration in the eyes or on the feet, and it is of long standing and does not improve with medical treatment, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries."
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	"And therefore when you want to cut those arteries which are the cause of the disease, first rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. And then firmly tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses. And the places of each artery above the places which are near the ears depressed are hidden unless in certain men."
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	"And then indicate the artery with a tent, and then cut each one with a sharp spatula of each party with an incision entering into the bone along the width of the head."
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	"And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at the incisions above."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	"And let the length of the incision be about two fingerbreadths, for when any vein is cut the blood issues with pulsatile exit, which flows forth by frequent spurts."
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	"But if the artery does not appear to your satisfaction, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space for three fingerbreadths and indicate it with a tent, and cut into the bone."
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	"And what amount of blood should be let out is about one pint. But a weak person lets out more or less of it, and all this depends on the quantity that appears of the strength of the disease and the fullness of the artery."
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then consider the wound, for if there remains on the bone any cause of the forehead, then cut that so that it does not become a hard swelling."
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then press the wound with feathers and bandages of linen cloth, and then cleanse it with egg whites until it is healed."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter Three."
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	"Concerning the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples."
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	"When some accident occurs such as migraine or sharp pain in the temples due to humidity or quality in the arteries of the temples, or if it is an old and violent one resembling them, and it is treated with medical methods without improvement, then we have recourse in these diseases to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown."
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	"The manner of operating and extracting those is that the patient removes the hairs which are on their temples; and understand where the artery appears in the temple when it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden in few men due to intensity."
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	"If it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be tightened with some cloth; and gently rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you."
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then you take the scalpel, which has this shape:"
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	"And then you cut the skin with that scalpel gently until you reach the artery; and then tie off where it enters and extract that from its upper parts until you extract that from the skin and expose those of its sheaths which are left, completely cut through."
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	"But if the artery is delicate, then surround it with the extremity of the needle and cut into that a bit according to how much its extremities are extended and contracted, so that there is no flow of blood, for otherwise the blood will not clot."
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	"And then evacuate three veins full of blood."
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	"And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong doubled catgut or long sutures, and do not wait for gangrene before consolidation of the wound occurs, otherwise there will be bleeding."
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	"And then cut off the superfluity which is between two limbs; and do this at that time or some other time."
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	"And if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron until the extremities of the cut are sealed, and this will be instead of that operation."
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	"And it is better not to cauterize if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; for cautery is one of those causes that increases thin humidities, and therefore it is better to avoid it in such cases."
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And it is necessary that in the extraction of arteries which are near the joint socket, they be dusted with fine powder and then dressed with dry medicines to stimulate tissue growth, and also with poultices so that they may heal."
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"And if during the operation there occurs bleeding from the artery, then you should stop it either with cautery or else compress the wound with your hand until the bleeding is stopped."
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	"And if there is no other cause at hand, then press the fingers on the wound until the bleeding stops, and then rinse the wound with water of intense coldness until the heat subsides, and dress it according to what is necessary."
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	"And what is easier in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this hot iron having two notches, because you have cut both ends with a probe, and then deposit it quickly, burning slightly, until it reaches the bone and cuts through the vein at both ends, so that what lies between its extremities is elongated since they are not consolidated by this cautery."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	"And let the heat of the two notches be equal."
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	"But if the heat is less than the two notches are better, for if they are too hot near each other it does not cut the flesh quickly."
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	"So that with these being somewhat thick, the heat of the fire is maintained and the flesh is severed easily."
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is better than all others and more lightweight.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	The distance between two ribs should be as thick as a finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of acute and acidic tears in the eyes
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acidic tears, it is the body of those veins that are above the head's crown that are affected, and no medical cause can be found for this condition. Sometimes the patient's face becomes reddened, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were walking there. The eyes become weakened and watery to the point where the eyelashes stick together, and the skin around them becomes rough due to the acidity of the tears. The ancient remedy for this condition is as follows, and it should be applied without delay:
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	"I command the patient to raise their eyebrows that are on their forehead and then incise three equal furrows there according to the length of the forehead."
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	"And if the length of the furrow is two fingers: let one furrow be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly below the movement of the muscles that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side."
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	"And beware of the incision of the arteries that are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws."
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if the space of each incision is the amount of three fingers placed together."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	If you have on hand a sponge prepared with dry cloths to absorb blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula of two pointed extremities, which is shaped like this:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which should be placed between the temples towards the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Remove with that all the chain which is between two incisions and place it above the bone, then do this from the middle incision to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then insert into this spatula and place it into the first incision again with another instrument called a scalpel which is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And cut with that sharp side next to the attached flesh near the chain, and also cut on the inner side of the bone, then employ it so that it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But make sure that the incision continues until you can see the chain, and then do this in the middle fissure towards the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And since some blood may have flowed out, express the places where the blood clots are located.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then press in each fissure carefully with cotton wool, and apply those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar to prevent the formation of pus.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day untie the ligament and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea. Then cure it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Capítulo V
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Regarding the treatment of injuries caused by cuts and the descent of parts from inside the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When someone suffers from cuts that are sharp and continuous, and sometimes the eyelids of the sick person appear thin and pale, and their gaze is weakened, and the eyelids become ulcerated and in their case the hair falls out, and there is acute painful sensation in the forehead followed by excessive sweating, then you should know that these materials and cuts do not come from outside but from small veins that originate from inside.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these cases is this: command the sick person to raise their forehead, and then cut a fissure in that middle point of the forehead about half an inch wide (starting from the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision should be between the bones; and remove your hand from the temples' muscles which are attached due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the fissure with cotton wool or with linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then press down from above with powders mixed in wine and oil to prevent the formation of pus.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you untie it and see that the pus has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where it begins to have flesh, and then cure it with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to emerge, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together to make a plaster and apply it to these wounds until the fresh flesh appears.
Capitol .vi.	Capítulo VI
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Regarding the treatment of cuts on the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	There are four causes of cuts on the ears: either it is due to a mineral point like stone, or something similar such as iron and bronze, or it is due to plants such as thorns or beans, or it is due to a flowing cause such as water and vinegar and things like them, or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And when a stone cut the ear or some other similar cause that does not fit well in the ear and causes pain, then place the ear in the sun, and if it is sharp, then distill into that cause some violet oil or safflower oil, and apply the extract of it, and make them sneeze with some condiment, and plug their nose during the arrival of the sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then place on the circumference of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretch the ear upwards at its parts because very often it is forgotten with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not removed, then apply the extract of it using the instrument called "gesti epicicarious subtile" which has this form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	"If a birth has been forgotten in motion, it's well. If not, then administer extraction with a subtle hook of little duplication."
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	"And thus if it has not been forgotten because of that, then make a cannula of silver and insert its tip into the tear of the eardrum, closing around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing gets in except for the cannula."
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	"And then extract [the fetus] with a small windlass with strong attraction, because many have seen this that we have spoken about."
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	"But if it has not been forgotten in this manner, then take hot pitch or sometimes prepared wax with which the ears are taken a small amount, and pause that on the tip of the arrow, and then wrap it around that gently paused spot."
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	"And then insert that into the tear of the ear with ease, and also remove the ear from its moisture."
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	"And therefore if it has not been forgotten in all the causes that we have spoken about, then you should cut off that before it becomes an abscess or spasm."
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	"And the way to cut off that is that you first sanctify the patient with the vein of the head and extract the blood according to its strength, and then make that cheese between your hands and convert the ear to the parts of it, and finish with a small incision in the root of the ear where there is pressure from it."
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon that reaches to the stone, and when the stone is hardened, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments, and then close up the incision at that time with haste, and cure it until it is healed."
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cause of the pain in the ear is one of the hairs that are growing and swollen, then administer the cure and extraction of it. But if it does not obey your efforts, then you should take a fine pointed probe in this shape:"
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	"I will administer to him the removal of that stone which has fallen into his ear."
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	"And do not do this if you think that the stone has already been moistened by earwax, and pause for a moment, removing it with tweezers or some subtle gesture, or using an incision as described above, because removal will be easier."
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	"Put water into the ear from which the patient suffers from sneezing at the beginning, and fill their ear with a small piece of cotton wool, and place your finger over that ear into which the water has entered. If it flows out, then good; but if not, then take slender stones or pebbles according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire for a short time, and let the patient insert one of these into the opening of their ear and jump up and down on one foot over that side, striking with another stone upon the stone which is within the ear."
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	"Then cease this until all the water has been expelled."
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	"And if the water is not expelled in this way, then take some paper or cotton wool, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end towards the fire until it catches light."
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	"And then put in another piece of cotton wool and do this as many times as necessary until all the water is expelled, and afterwards squeeze it out with a syringe as mentioned above regarding the stone extractor."
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	"If something enters the ear, if it is a small object, then do as I have said above regarding pushing it out. But if it is a large object which causes pain in the area of the cheekbone, then extract it with hooks and forceps. The cause of this is usually easier to remove than all other causes that occur in the ear."
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	"But if a worm has been engendered in the ear, when you are treating it with what I have mentioned above regarding the division and treatise on distillations and yet do not succeed in your treatment, then look into the ear towards the sun."
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if you see anything here which is the cause of worms, then extract it with hooks or fine forceps. But if you do not see anything, then take a cannula with a narrow end below and wide above, the shape of which is as follows:"
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	"And insert the narrow end of this into the ear according to how much it can tolerate without causing pain. Then suck with it forcefully several times until all the worms have been expelled."
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	"But if this does not obey you, then plug and close the opening of the cannula with wax as I have mentioned above. Then perform the same distillations which were previously described in the treatment of worms, which you will find in the treatise on distillations."
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And this is your method with which you should pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which this is the shape:"
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	"And make it of silver or brass, narrow below and with a small hole in it above."
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	"And so that it fits into the concavity of the cannula without blocking it where necessary."
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	"And if you wish, take the wand and wrap its end with soft cotton wool, then pour oil into the concavity of the cannula or juice from some herb or whatever medicine you wish in the cannula — which is already inserted in the ear — and then insert the wand with the cotton wool above it and gently squeeze it with your hand until the oil has been expelled into the concavity of the cannula and the patient feels the oil inside."
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	"And whatever is poured into the ear should be first warmed slightly over fire."
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	"And make sure that the cause which you distil into the ear is not too hot, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate this."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	"Of the treatment of blockage of ears."
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children sometimes exit from the wombs of their mothers unperforated, and this has happened in some men, opacity in the middle of the ear due to phlegm or flesh undigested in that place; and this opacity is sometimes formed in the front of the opening of the ear which does not hinder sight, and sometimes it is on the outside parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in its front, which does not comprehend sight, is among the most difficult conditions to heal.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And regarding that one where sight succeeds, it is necessary that you hold the sick person's ear towards the sun and look at that.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus if sometimes opacity appears, open that with a subtle spatula of which this is its shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the end of it where its width is small, one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be of two lion's teeth to prevent injury to the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And thus if the opacity is due to flesh born in the ear or in its membrane, then use those with subtle forceps and cut that violently until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if opacity is in front of the ear, then take a subtle lion's hair and heat it with fire a little, and put that into the membrane of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And thus if there is opacity with what the sick person finds easy, due to gravity of hearing, forcefully remove that oppression with ease; and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place the ear drop made of it according to the quantity of the width of the tract which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or else take any wax and insert that into water and pulverize it over it three times and use it; and if sometimes the ear is already inflamed, then it is necessary that you cut the wax and replace it with another wax which you will wrap in cerot made with crushed rose oil until the inflammation has been cauterized; and then treat it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then immerse a sponge or cloth in hot water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which restricts blood flow, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the Treatment of Swelling Which Occurs on the Eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	"Those who have experienced some moisture on their eyelids occasionally are sometimes dry-eyed."
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	"Therefore you should have those [servants] ready with towels or cloths, and untie those [servants'] aprons from their waists, and carefully pause over the area as described."
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	"If pain comes with blood flow, then cauterize it with a fine silver-hot cautery."
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	"And the best cauterization is close to incisions and wounds that repeatedly return when there remains some cause of their weeping; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burnt up and do not return."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter Nine."
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	"Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids."
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	"Many times it happens that in the eyelids there is some cause that resembles hardness and toughness, and for this reason it is called swelling."
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	"And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the left eyelid above."
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	"Therefore, the operation in their case is that if the swelling appears on the outside of the eyelid and extends all around; its cause is light."
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	"Therefore, cut over that [swelling] with a transverse incision, and carefully explore around it with ease; and suspense it with pressure and cut off that [swelling]."
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	"But if you cannot easily make the incision of it except by pushing and gradually penetrating the eyelid with an incision; then know that there is no cause."
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if its size is large, then adjust it with suturing; and cure it until it is healed."
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	"And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from that because the ointment for it restores it and heals it."
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	"And if the swelling leans towards the inside of the eyelid below the surface, then raise up the eyelid and suspense the swelling with pressure, except that you do not need to make an incision; and press it all around; and if the eyelid is lengthened by incision, then know there is no cause."
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	"And when you make the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure that place with what heals until it is healed."
Capitol .x.	"Chapter X."
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	"Of the treatment of swelling above the eyelid."
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	"Swelling is a growth that occurs in the tissues of the eyelid above, and especially in children, it aggravates their eyes and affects their sight greatly; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears flow down to them."
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	"And therefore they constantly have to keep their heads elevated and sleep with their heads raised; and because of this the eyelids of their left eyes become wet and inflamed, and there is already a threat of swelling apparent in the eye; and when you press that place with your fingers, you feel heat within them."
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	"And there is some way of operating in that case where the illness causes him to hold his head tilted back with his chin raised up and covered with a cloth; and make a circle around it according to its size, and place that on it and press with your fingers all around until swelling is gathered together in the middle of the circle; and then cut through the middle of that humidity with a spatula incision made transverse, and let the incision not be greater than the incision that is made in trepanation."
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	"But beforehand cover that you cut through the entire cord until you reach the swelling, because in most cases it proceeds through a fissure according to its form of whitish hardness."
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	"Therefore extract it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers at the outer parts and roll them between your right and left hand until it is completely gone."
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	"And be sure that you do not adjust in the incision lest with the spatula you reach the eye and damage it."
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	"But if no swelling appears at the beginning of the incision, then adjust it slightly with ease until swelling proceeds; and then extract it as we have said; and then apply cloths dipped in wine and vinegar to that place and cover it with powders."
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	"And there are some who throw salt onto it and cover it up in the concavity of the incision so that what remains of that humidity."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure it until it is healed."
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	"But if an abscess occurs in the place after, then cure it with cataplasms of Cedar until it is healed."
Capitol .xi.	"Chapter XI."
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	"Of methods for examining the eye."
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	"When the eyelids of the eyes are born with adjusted left eyelashes and overgrown eyebrows, then they do not allow light to reach the eye and cause ways of illness such as continuous tears and inflammation of the eyelids and skin, which could be the cause of destruction of the eye that is called 'tactinir' of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or with acute medicine according to what has been said earlier in the chapter on cautery; or it is done by tactinir through incision and suturing; or by canthotomy as I will say."
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	"And therefore you should hold the head of the ill person tilted back; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that's good; but if not, insert a needle into that one in which there is fat near the outer edge of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the fat above, and close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are located, and pull the thread up with the eyelid folded back using tweezers."
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	"And then make an incision in the area inside the eyelid near the adjusted hairs with a spatula incision from the greater lacrimal duct into the lesser lacrimal duct; and then extract the thread and put powdered small bits of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and sew it back together with needle and thread, so that it resembles the shape of a myrtle leaf."
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	"But nevertheless the shape should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because that is already diversified in people, since some require a greater incision of the eyelid according to how much it has become inflamed."
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	"And then make an incision with the spatula along the two lines which you have sewn together, starting from the greater lacrimal duct and going into the lesser lacrimal duct."
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	"And if your incision is close to the natural hairs like the thickness of a barleycorn."
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	"And then place a clamp on one of the two angles of the cord and then excoriate it completely, and then approximate the two lips with stitches using gut or thin thread of wool, and remove the blood, and make what is superfluous from the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some adhesive agent if you wish to do so, otherwise don't bother."
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	"And then leave the stitches for three or four days, and then dress it."
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	"And if you wish, leave the plaster without stitches and dress it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the plaster and the adhesion of glue; but stitching is better. And this is what the ancients said about taxanir."
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	"But nevertheless, if there is solicitude over the illness and it is of good operation, then fear should not be present in him."
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	"And there is another manner in taxanir, which is to sew the eyelid with stitches resembling a myrtle leaf shape, and then lift the eyelid using three separated and gathered threads according to this form:"
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"If this is not possible, hold the eyelids open, and if they do not stay open, then take a needle with thread attached and insert it into the center of the eye socket. Insert another thread near the larger lacrimal gland, and a second thread near the smaller one, adjust these threads evenly between your fingers, and raise your hand slightly upward to lift up the entire eyelid."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And next, adjust both lips of the wound with stitches, and dress the area that is healing."
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	"If an abscess appears around your incision or wound, drain it with cerote and clean the surrounding area thoroughly."
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	"And sometimes the eyelid margin turns inward, in which case you should use the technique mentioned earlier for incision; but stitching is usually more effective."
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	"The procedure for cauterization with hot irons is as follows:"
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	"And if you wish to cauterize the eyelid margin, first turn it inward and then incise along the line indicated earlier; next, prepare two thin wires or rods whose length is equal to that of the eyelid margin and whose width is less than that of a needle."
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	"And once you have incised both ends of each cut, grasp the threads with your forceps."
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	"Apply each with subtlety beneath this which superfluously flows from the eyelid of the eye, and compress the tubes of each divided part with strong constriction, leaving it so for several days, because the conduit will die and be denied due to the constriction, and it can enter until such time that it falls by itself."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	"If it is delayed, break the thread with the tweezers, and immediately cure the ulcer until it is healed."
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	"Once it has hardened, elevate the eyelid and the hairs will not pinch."
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	"And this is the form of two tubes which you shall make according to this form:"
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	"and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less."
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	"Regarding the elevation of painful hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard."
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	"When hairs are unnatural, hard, rough and painful to the eye, then the operation in this case is that you take a subtle needle and place it on that thread of fine silk and lion's hair, and carefully adjust its ends so that it does not hurt."
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	"And let the length of the threads be of the quantity of a palm."
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	"Then take another subtle thread and tie it below it, and knot its ends if you wish."
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	"And then place the patient's head on a pillow facing the sun so that your work is illuminated, for this is subtle and delicate surgery."
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	"And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you extract it from above the natural hair."
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	"And then pull out the hair from above and insert that one in its place; let there be one or two or three hairs, but no more than that."
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	"And then remove your hand with the hair so that it is completely outside of the eyelid along with the natural hair."
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	"But if the hair is pulled out along with it and the pellet is not removed, you will pull it again on both sides with the thread that you have prepared with it until the pellet comes out from underneath."
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	"And then close it with the vision of the eye, for then you will remove both the hair and the thread, wipe carefully and close the eyelid, and leave it like that for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows back good flesh."
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	"And if the hair is too short, then you adjust a long natural hair and lift it with that one; or let it remain until it grows out about some space, and then you lift it."
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of twitching that occurs on top of the eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When twitching occurs in the eyelid, it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts on top, either to the right or left side, due to bad consolidation of plague, section, or cauterization; and this twitching is called "leporina," and this twitching can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by consolidation of plague, sections, or cauterizations, or by resembling those who are afflicted.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation for this is that you should cut open that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it a wick of linen cloth dipped in water, and tie those up until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary that you use any cure for this that dries or constricts it, because if you do so, it will return to twitching worse than ever before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use on it causes that soften it like fenugreek, and soak it with the water in which it is cooked and sown, or with diachylon ointment, which has been liquefied with some of its oils, and dip the wick in that, and cure it with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you should perforate with everything that is not consolidated according to the form that it had at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have spoken of is nothing but some correction of twitching that does not return to its original form again.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	"Concerning the treatment of blepharitis occurring in the eyelid."
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	"This blepharitis, which occurs on the left eyelid, is properly called blepharitis. It may be either congenital or acquired."
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	"Acquired blepharitis is caused by inflammation or injury or burning or other similar conditions."
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	"The procedure for performing this operation is as follows: Take a needle with doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, then pass it from the left lachrymal duct to the right, so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	"And then extend the flesh at its two ends using the needle and cauterize it with the hot needle, then cut it open with a wide spatula."
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	"And then if the eyelid returns to its normal shape, that is good. But if not, take a splint and place it in the slit of the eyelid, and with that turn the eyelid back into position, and suture the two wounds on the inner side of the left eyelid."
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	"And if the ends of the two wounds are at two corners of the incision, then make sure that they meet, and that their angle is such that when they come together they form a straight line."
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	"And this shape is called the Greek letter lambda (λ)."
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	"And then remove that flesh on the amount that is equal to the thickness of the eyelid on its inner side."
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then approximate the separated parts and suture them with linen thread; and then dress it using the moistening medicines and compresses that we have mentioned, until it is healed."
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	"And if there are any recurrences later due to a wound, suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you make an incision with a flat blade on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been described above."
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	"And then separate with a compress between the two lips according to what we have said."
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	"In summary of the discourse on the treatment of inflammation when it is above or below, that which runs in the operation according to what has been prepared for the form of inflammation is very diverse."
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	"And the skilled artisan always prepares everything in every possible way that it is possible for him to restore the figure to its natural form or near to it, and this illness according to what suits him of the operation and instruments in the most favorable circumstances."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter .xv."
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea."
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this condition occurs in many men, such that the eyelid is solidified above with albumen of egg white, and prohibited from its natural movement and functions, then you should insert the edge of a knife beneath the eyelid and lift it upwards or stretch it open with a hook.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Next, you should incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which is not too sharp to avoid harming the tissues. Use one that is somewhat blunt so as not to cause discomfort to the patient during the operation, and carefully move the spatula to avoid damaging the eye.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	Your incision should extend just enough to release that adhesion, allowing the eyelid to return naturally to its original form and for all the adhesions to be healed.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Next, you should apply saltwater to the eye, using which you will rinse it clean; or, dissolve sugar of lead in water and use this solution instead.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then, gently separate the eyelid from the eye using cotton soaked in egg white, and apply a compress made of linen infused with egg white. On the third day, begin applying consolidating ointments to promote healing.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of incision of the nail and caruncle of the lacrimal apparatus.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that there are two types of nail: one is nervous and similar to hard skin; the other is non-nervous and similar to congealed white humor. When the latter is touched by forceps, it may become detached and the forceps may not grasp it properly.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	"And both species begin only from the larger tear duct, which gradually covers the eye, prohibiting light and its movement."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	"Then the manner of operating in the incision is that the patient holds their head back while you open their eyelids, lift the eyelid with your thumb, and carefully grasp the edge of it with tweezers."
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	"And then you take a needle and insert it into the edge of the eyelid, whether it be that of a horse, cow, ox, or similar, and fold the tip of the needle little by little until it is in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and pull the eyelid with thread; extend it to the outer edges and remove excess skin from around the pupil."
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	"And then you follow that thread through behind it."
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	"And then you incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift the tissue of the natural lacrimal away so that there is no continuous flow of tears through the incision."
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And sometimes the eyelid is extended with only one edge or thread, as we have said, and then it should be carefully excised with a lion's claw spatula, which has this shape:"
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	"And be sure that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and that there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"Then the incision should be washed with a little salt water or clear honey and left open for another day; and then it should be cured with water until it is healed."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	"And if the eyelid is not swollen and you cannot insert the needle or it does not stay in place, then often this type of eyelid is cured with medicines, and is healed by stitching it up again in the division."
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	"And if you want to incise it, then open the wound of the eyelid and take a fine lion's claw spatula with sharp points shaped like this:"
am subtilitat.	"with fineness."
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	"And if sometimes the eyelid becomes hardened and contracted and stuck in its root, then distill from your mouth into the wound clear honey or rose water or salted water, and close the wound the next day."
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	"And then continue operating on that eyelid until everything that is of it has been removed, except for the contrary aposteme, which should be left in the wound, for when you close it, cure the aposteme at first so that it may heal."
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	"And then continue your operation on that eyelid until it is healed."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"If the prominence of the lacrimal caruncle is found in the wound causing great harm, then suspend it with a thread. Incise that from there with one cut, but do not complete the incision so as not to incite continuous tearing."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"Then promptly distill into the lachrymal chief rue and make it saturated so that it may be healed."
Capitol .xvii.	Here is the translation of Chapter XVII from "Capitulum":
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	"Concerning the incision of an abscess and what is born of flesh adhering to a bone."
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	"Sometimes flesh grows in the eyes of some people, pressing upon it so as to cover the pupil, or approaching or adhering to the eyelids and thus forcing the eyelids apart at their margins like the petals of a flower."
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	"When operating in this manner, let the patient lean their head back on the table. Then open both eyes of that person and collect all that flesh with suitable scissors, taking care not to harm the eye with them; then carefully cut through all the flesh at its beginning using a scalpel, being careful not to slip during your operation."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	"And let your incision be such that you cut through it completely, using either a scalpel or the spathula which we have recommended for nail cutting, or small forceps with which you can collect scar tissue according to what is appropriate in this case."
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"After your incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with finely crushed salt or drop into it powder similar to that of corrosive medicines. Then place over the eye a bandage of egg-white so as to ensure proper healing of the wound."
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	"And if there is some swelling and the wound is suppurating with cauterization feared, then leave the eye alone and treat that abscess according to what pleases you. Then repeat this operation until it is healed, doing likewise for any flesh that has grown into the eye of this kind."
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	"But you must avoid all care of the eye with forceps or any other instrument, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member can bear such operation."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	"Of the collection of scar tissue in the eye."
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"Scar tissue are veins that become hard on the eye and prevent its operation. They can be removed after several days of using a compress."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	"At the beginning it is necessary that you observe whether the eye with scar tissue is healthy and not suffering from any other illness besides scar tissue, then collect that scar tissue."
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	"And when you command the patient to hold his head steady and suspend those veins with one or two threads according to your discretion, that thread should be of fine doubled silk in this manner:"
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	"or two threads graduating into one body thus:"
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"And then tie those veins with fine forceps carefully and gently, wiping away blood from time to time until you see that those veins are completely removed from the eye and turned back."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"And be careful not to touch the eye with the sharp point of the spathula. Also, if your operation is performed in the middle of the day facing the sun, be very firm in your operation so that you do not scratch anything but those veins."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"And when you have completed the operation, then drop into the eye chief vinegar or rosewater for its sharpness will corrode what has been removed from the scar tissue."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if it is not possible to remove everything in that hour, then plaster the wound with whatever pleases you for its pain, and leave it alone for several days until the pain has subsided and it is assured that no inflammation will occur."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And repeat this treatment according to your best judgment until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"Here is the shape of the forceps:"
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On the reduction of a fractured nose
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	"When you treat a fracture of the nose with cautery or irritating medicine according to its narration and it does not heal, then do not try to set it until you have opened up over the inflammation at its maturity and drawn out all the moisture and pus until the bone is exposed."
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument shaped thus:"
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	"And it is called the 'sharp head', and should be made of hard steel with a round head thus, having small holes pierced by a file or awl for fine piercing."
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	"And place it on the corrupted part of the bone and turn it between your fingers while pressing gently until you know that all corruption has been scraped away."
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	"And do this several times, then restore the place with drying and astringent remedies."
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	"Therefore if the place is consolidated and good flesh has been produced there, and the skin has separated from the healthy part and remained for forty days without being renewed or inflamed or having any accident happen to it, then you know that it is healed."
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	"But if not, then do not try to set it but reduce the fracture according to the shape of the nose in this way: first uncover the broken bone with a file or irritating medicine. And when the bone is exposed, then take tweezers shaped thus:"
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	"The ends of its iron are triangular, and its shaft is thinly tapered towards the end as seen here."
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	"And then place it on the bone near the lacrimal duct; lengthen your hand a little from the eye and turn your hand with the tweezers until all the bone has entered, and the patient feels pain because of the wind that escapes through there when you move your hand."
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	"Then restore the place with drying and astringent medicines as I have told you earlier."
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	"So when the flesh has grown and the place is hardened, then the matter that formerly flowed outwards returns to the nose, which is now easily produced upon the pain."
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of the prominence of the eye
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the swelling has reached its fullness and no apparent harm or reduction occurs, then you should release the patient, and next follow them, and next place cool compresses on the head without scarification and suck with a good suction cup; and next apply a liniment to the swelling made of aloe, acacia, mustard, and sarcocolia, and finally sprinkle the poultice on the swelling with many powders.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The manner of the powders is that you should take cloths of lion's mane mushrooms, each cloth being folded in four layers; and make them from those mushrooms.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place those one on top of the other according to the quantity that the swelling has required.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then place on top of those a hard cloth with strong binding, and repeat the suction cups without scarification; and then remove the suction cups and let the swelling rest day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if during this time the bandage becomes loose, it should be tightened again.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And likewise remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the swelling has already been reduced, that is good; and if not, then repeat the poultice with powders, binding, and suction cups until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is disruption in the tunic of the uvea and it becomes prominent and projects outside the eyelids like a grain of mustard seed, and the shape of a human face appears due to this, and you wish to incise that, then the operation in that case is as follows: You should insert the needle into the depression of the uvea from below upwards, and next insert another needle on the side where the lacrimal gland is located, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and next incise the location of the doubled thread and lift up with that the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and pull it tight.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And next remove the needle and place on top a pad infused in egg white albumen and leave it there until the thread with the uvea falls.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then dress the wound with something that will comfort it until the inflammation is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes it happens that the entire part is attached with a band of cloth around the wound where there is a prominent swelling, and then it should be perforated with a fine spatula that comes to the front of the wound, and the humid albume runs down, and thus the wound descends and enters quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then pull it tight until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De curacio de alconati.	Of the treatment of an inflamed eye.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness called aconati is naught but phlegm, which collects in the body like descending water.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	To treat this illness, make the patient sit on an upright chair and hold their head firmly in your hands on both sides. Then press the area where you see the phlegm gathering until it stops flowing downwards, and keep their mouth closed so that no air escapes while you do this.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	"If the descent is not prepared for the patient as mentioned earlier, then hold the patient's hands and carefully take a thin spatula and insert it over the fatty tissue around the corner of the conjunctiva with the tunica cornea at the entrance (into the wound), until the sanies is expelled."
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	"Then, once it has been expelled, immediately apply lukewarm water in which honey or gruel made from fenugreek and honey has been dissolved."
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	"And likewise, treat other causes until the patient is healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII."
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	"On the treatment of watery discharge from the eye."
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	"We have already discussed the types of watery discharge and which ones are suitable to be treated with speech therapy, according to the patient's condition."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	"Then, make the patient sneeze into a handkerchief and have them wipe their eyes with it, using firm pressure."
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	Approach and place your left hand near the eyelid of the patient's left eye if the eye with water is the left one; otherwise, use your right hand if the eye is on the right side.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	Approach and with your right hand take a towel if the eye is left; otherwise, use your left hand if the eye is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	Approach the tip of the towel near the corner of the eye along the thickness of the eyelid near the inner tear duct, and carefully wipe the eye with the towel using your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Enter the eyelid and wait until you feel that the towel has reached its wet spot.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	Make sure the path of the towel is parallel to the measurement from the pupil's edge to the end of the pupil's darkness, which is the corner of the eye; thus you will see the pupil with clarity through the cornea.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	Approach the towel to where the water is inside the eye, then gently pull it down once or twice, and immediately if the water flows downwards you will see that the patient's vision improves quickly. Leave the towel in place over the eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then wait a moment; if the water has flowed downwards, then gently wipe once more to ensure that no towel lint remains.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	Then, when it is dry and no longer flows downwards, gently remove the towel with ease, turn your hand slowly bit by bit, dissolve a little of gem-quality salt in water, wash the inside of the eye with that, and then apply cotton wool soaked in rose oil and alum water to the outer corner of the eye, and tie it there.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Let us pause here on this subject, as those who are of our time should wait upon that which is written in books about this matter.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the towel does not obey you when inserting it into the eye due to its stiffness — for some men have eyes that are very hard — then you should take the spatula called an "albreda," which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	Then perform the conjunctival fornix with that [spatula], and do not end your hand in the track, and if you cannot make way for the towel to its subtle location.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then gently insert the towel as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area in a dark room where they can sleep on their back without any movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Pause for the nature of the water so that its nature is pure, and do not move your head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let the bandage remain in place according to its position until the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then untie that [bandage] in that dark room and examine the free sight, show him some objects, then tie it back up again on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not perform this procedure during the hours of darkness or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Therefore, be careful with this because water can flow easily and abundantly from the eye due to intense gazing.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess appears, then you should untie the bandage on the seventh day and correct it with something that will drain the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you should loosen the sight of the eye and pause on the face of it orally for which the gaze of the other eye is guided downwards towards that one for several days while remaining in a dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	Then gradually lead him out of that dark room and converse with him about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know this: in the art of surgery, the apprentice is not excused from practicing some operations on living eyes. Therefore, you should be bold about performing these operations.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to our attention that some of those who practice the art of surgery say that fire is made in the eye with a hollow tube through which water is sucked out.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	However, we have not seen this done in our land, nor is it written in any of the books of the ancients. It may well be a novel procedure.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of eye medications for those who do not know them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They should be made of iron or brass specifically, and they should have their extremities cut in this subtle triangular shape, with the point being like this:
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Concerning the treatment of flesh torn from the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When different pieces of flesh are born in the nose that are attached to each other, and one cause of this is the assembly of many heavy scorpions or large polyps, this illness is called "polypus" because it resembles that type of polyp.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And its flesh is cancerous and black in color; but it is not that kind of flesh called "lion's flesh" which is not black in color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that case where it is not fraudulent or cancerous lion's flesh, you should make the patient sneeze between your hands and hold them over the sun, then blow his nose and pinch him on those pieces of flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	Then remove that [polyp] from its exterior parts, and then carefully cut off with a sharp pointed spatula what you have grasped of those pieces on one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed. But if any cause remains for which excision is possible, then quickly remove it with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that no cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is bleeding profusely or an abscess appears, then pause and do what is necessary. Or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut it out and cauterize that [area] until there is no more bleeding and all the cavities are open.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then let him be sprinkled in the nose with a mixture of vinegar and water or vinegar alone.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and its moisture extends to the palate, then know that it has already been healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then know that there is flesh torn from the upper bones of the nose that has not been removed by excision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should insert a feather into his nostril with some thickness, and rub it in both nostrils, pausing between each rubbing for the length of one finger or more. Then generate the sneeze and insert an extremity of the feather into the nose with the reed or with another cause that is possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after that has been done, let him throw his breath into the nostrils until it reaches the canals of the nose, and let it be exhaled over his throat, because many children at school often do this action, and it is an easy thing to do for anyone who wishes.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Then pause the two extremities of the feather, one extremity that exits over the nose and the other that remains in the nose. Then administer a suture of flesh with the threads on the feather, and do this until you know that the flesh is attached to the threads of the feather.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	Then remove the feather and pause in the nose with the abstraction of blood for one day, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has rotted all that is left of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then at the end of the cause, pause in the nose with a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you desire an operation that dries up, use cautery with it.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the shape of the instrument called "capipurge maker" with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or brass, shaped like a small open lamp with a small mouth, as shown in the picture.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	"If you wish, make a closed cannula like a pipe, with the instrument's funnel-shaped end being flat and open. Hold this at the patient's rear while evacuating oil or water that you desire from their secretions."
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	"This purge is precious: take castor oil, white hellebore, ginger, cumin, long pepper, scammony, ephedra, and unicorn root. Mix together with beet juice and cabbage juice, make them into pills, crush one pill with hot water, and give it to the patient to drink."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter 25"
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	"About nostrils that are in the outer parts of the nose."
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	"It is rarely seen that a nostril appears on the outer part of the nose, and it is much admired and praised in those days when one sees such."
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	"And for this reason, you should cut off that nostril at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	"And then pause upon the place where you have cut, cauterize or apply a burning medicine there."
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	"But if its excision is delayed until it becomes much admired, then consider whether it is walled-off, hard, of dark color and has little sensation. If so, do not touch that area with iron for it is a cranky ulcer; many times that which you incise may spread great mischief over the person who had it."
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	"And if the ulcer is of mild appearance and not dark-colored, sometimes incision may be possible throughout it. Therefore evacuate the disease and incise it without fear, then cure the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter 26"
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	"About the suture of the nose, lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by plague or scarring."
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	"You should know that when disruption of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages (nose, lips or ear), little is gained from that operation except for a few men."
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore, when some cause occurs to those parts (nose, lips or ear), you should consider if it is a fresh plague with its own blood. Then join the two lips of the plague with suture, and afterward cure it until it heals."
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	"And if the lips of disrupted continuity are already separated, and each is fairly healthy, then you should cut out each section of its apparent path until no blood appears."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then join the two lips with suture and strengthen them. On top of that, sprinkle dragon's blood powder and heat it three times, then place a piece of diaphoretic plaster or some other consolidating plaster on the wound for two to three days, after which remove it and replace the plaster until it adheres by itself. Then cure with an ointment until healed."
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	"But the manner of suture is that you approximate the disrupted continuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal wounds or use fine thread as you know how."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter 27"
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	"For the extraction of those causes that appear in both lips in cases of internal disease."
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	"Often seen among many men in cases of internal disease are hard tumors resembling gristle on both sides of the lips; some small and others larger."
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore you should turn the lips and split each of those hardnesses on both sides, and after the incision make the wound bleed completely until it stops flowing; then wash the area with vinegar and treat it with an astringent water to heal."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"The Incision of Adherent Flesh in the Gums."
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	"Often seen is this: over the adherent flesh of the gum which the ancients called albulus. Therefore you should suspend it with a thread or hold it with forceps and incise it down to its root, allowing the wound to drain."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	"And then apply a poultice made of healing herbs or sprinkle powder that is astringent or caustic over the wound."
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	"If that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, for it will not return otherwise."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"Regarding teeth with iron [i.e., dental fillings or braces made of iron]."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"When on the surface of teeth in places where teeth have been broken off or removed, and between the gums, there are rough, sharp, and sometimes blackish scales, with greenish-yellow matter or fluid that flows into the gum, then the teeth are decayed."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	"And therefore you must do this: place the patient between your thighs and press their head against the back of their neck, and scrape off the scales from those teeth where such appearances occur, causing it to resemble sand, so that no cause remains. And this is done regarding blackness, greenness-yellowishness, and other discolorations."
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	"So if the above is not what you desire at the beginning of this section, then you may repeat the procedure on another day, or on the second and third days until you reach your desired outcome."
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	"And know that teeth require various types of cutting tools with different shapes and figures according to what is prepared for your operation."
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	"And therefore the chisel with which a tooth is cut from its broken part is different from that used to scrape between teeth in other ways. And these forms of chisels are what you should prepare now:"
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
D’eradicacio de dentz.	"Tooth Extraction."
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	"The tooth that you are treating for its pain may grow again and require complete removal because there is no reason why it should not regrow once it has been removed since it is a substance prone to recurrence in its removal."
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	"Therefore when the patient is forced to have that tooth removed, you must be firmly certain what the painful tooth is because often the pain occurs in a healthy tooth and if you remove the wrong one, the pain will not stop until the actual painful tooth is removed, as we have seen happen during operations by barbers."
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	"Therefore when you are certain what the painful tooth is and know it well, then you should scarify around the tooth with spathum in which there is some virtue until it dissolves from the tooth's gum completely. Afterwards remove that with your tweezers, or with delicate forceps little by little until it comes loose."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	"Then use your large forceps with good traction or sturdy construction, and grasp the head of the disease firmly between them so that it does not slip away from you. Then remove the tooth straightly in such a way that neither breaks nor causes greater pain to the patient."
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and insert it on either side of the tooth with ease and effort for its removal as was done at the beginning."
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	"But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you must first cover that break with wax and strengthen it with the extremity of a thin wire so that it may not be further broken during your constriction upon it with forceps."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"And you must work carefully with the scarification around all parts of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break or tear it apart and return upon the patient for a greater pain than the first one."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	"And beware of doing what many ignorant barbers do in their foolishness and boldness regarding extraction without administering what we have recommended. For often they cause great illnesses upon men which are more difficult to treat than the tooth itself, leaving behind roots entirely or partially removed, or removing teeth with some bones from the jaw as we have often witnessed."
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	"And after the extraction of the tooth, wash out the mouth with hot water mixed with salt."
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	"And if there is blood flowing from it afterwards, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it upon the wound. And if this does not suffice, cauterize."
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	"The form of the forceps and thin tweezers with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be long in extremity, short in handle, and thick so that they may not bend when using them."
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	"And let their handles be like those of tongs inside so that when you squeeze with them they do not bend, and their extremities are short."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	"And let them be made of India iron well-tempered and made with straight extremities. And on the extremities of these have teeth which fit into each other and grasp tightly for constriction. Sometimes the extremities of these are shaped like the beak of a bird called the ciconia, which is hooked, and they are of strong constriction."
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter XXXI
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the Extraction of Teeth and the Removal of Locked Jaw Bones.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is impacted and there remains some cause for retention, then you should apply heat with hot water or use tweezers or forceps the extremities of which are shaped like the beak of a bird called the ciconia or hooked, in this way:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	"The condition of their limbs appears like lime or chalk."
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	"And if you do not obey the instructions with these forceps or tongs, then you should place your hand on the root and strip off all the skin, and insert this instrument called such-and-such, which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:"
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"And it should have a short, thick end that does not extend too far so that it is not bent."
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	"Therefore, if the root has been severed by this means, good. Otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments, whose shapes are as follows:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	"The second instrument's shape should be triangular and have a very sharp tip."
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	"And here you will find help with this instrument, which has two handles in the following form:"
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	"And there are other instruments that resemble large oyster shells, and this is their shape:"
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"of the twisted or short triangular tip, which should be somewhat thick, and not pointed so as not to cause injury."
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	"And you should know that dental extraction tools are similar in form to other instruments."
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	"But the skilled and subtle craftsman finds for himself appropriate instruments according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases. For there are diseases for which ancient authors did not give or reserve proper instruments due to their diverse forms."
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the bone of the jaw or other mouth bones are sharp or cracked, then it is necessary to carefully use appropriate instruments and forceps for removing dental roots, as we have mentioned earlier. Here is a gesture with this form:"
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	"And it should be used gently little by little, and held tightly with the mouth so that it does not slip or escape until all of the bone is removed. Then apply medication appropriate to the area."
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is a small hole in the bone, then scrape away that hole and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	"Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others."
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	If teeth protrude beyond their natural course due to that form being disturbed, especially in women and even more so in venerable elders; therefore you must consider: if one tooth is not close to another tooth, and no surgery or splint can help, then that one should be removed; but if it is attached to another tooth, then you should cut that one with this instrument whose shape is like a pig's bristle, made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp point.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And your incision should be deep enough so that you can remove that tooth in three days due to the hardness of the tooth, without damaging any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an erupted tooth that needs grinding, then grind it with an Indian iron file whose shape is like this:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it all be of Indian iron and sharp; and have many small pointed teeth like those on a file with which the tooth is gently filed little by little over many days, so that no other tooth is damaged or broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And afterwards clean it well with thread and scrape it with sharp razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where one part is chipped and irritates the tongue, then you should grind that edge until its roughness is smoothed out and flattened so that the tongue does not rub against it and speech is not impeded.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are damaged due to concussion and removal by percussion or fracture, and the patient cannot eat because of it, and you have treated them with astringent medications, but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong enough, they should be restored with gold foil and not silver, because silver quickly tarnishes and turns black, while gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And the foil should be in such fineness and thinness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the method of application is as follows: take the foil and fold it in half between two healthy teeth, and then shape it with two curves of the foil between the damaged ones, or one curve if there is only one, so that the foil reaches the healthy part of the other tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then gradually fill in the space where you started, using your hand gently and skillfully so as not to damage the tooth.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And use a tool with which you press the foil between the roots of the teeth so that it does not shift.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and adapt them in each place with gestures, and turn them over and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then press it down as tightly as possible.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it comes loose or breaks off, reinforce it with more foil in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is how you repair two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as shown in the illustration below:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when one or two teeth return to their original position after the fracture, they should be repaired as described above, and then replaced.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	This is not something that just anyone can do; it requires skill and expertise.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes it is convenient to use the bones of a cow as a substitute for teeth. These should be shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and then strengthened with foil as described above, and they will serve well for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the frenulum that extends onto the tongue and interferes with speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This frenum that hangs down from the tongue sometimes occurs naturally or is acquired accidentally due to a healed injury.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The procedure is as follows: have the patient open their mouth and hold their head still. Then elevate the tongue and cut through the frenum with a scalpel along its width until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is some hardness or thickness in the frenum due to scar tissue from a healed injury, then you should first grease it with oil and cut through it along its width until you have completely severed the frenum and dissolved the scar tissue.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Be careful not to make a deep incision in the flesh of the front part of the tongue, lest you cut too deeply and cause bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then rinse the incision site with warm water or vinegar or salty water, and then apply a bandage to the tongue. Then tell the patient to keep their tongue out of their mouth at all times for several days to prevent reattachment of the frenum.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, apply a compress soaked in vinegar. If the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a silver nitrate cautery stick, which is appropriate for this purpose.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it according to other causes until it heals.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	"For the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue."
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Occasionally, an aposteme resembling a small blister may appear under the tongue and prevent its normal functioning.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in this case is to have the patient open their mouth wide before you, and examine the aposteme.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if it appears dark or black in colour, hard, where the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that part as it is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it appears white with humidity, then insert the tweezers into it and incise that little mucous membrane, and cut it completely; and if blood begins to flow during your operation, then pause for a moment, so that it may cease flowing.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work until you have completely removed it, ensuring that it is washed with vinegar and salt. Then treat it with the other cure until it has healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Concerning the extraction of an aposteme from both ears, and that which is situated in the throat, as well as other apostemes.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When a swelling appears in the throat, it is called glandular, which are often joined together and located externally, known as the ears. If you treat them with water according to what has been said in this division and they do not heal, then consider whether the aposteme is hard, dark coloured, and insensitive. If so, do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it appears red in colour and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood. Let it ripen on its own, and then you may remove it or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	"When it has a white color, consistency, and its root is delicate, then that one should be incised."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And before your operation, consider whether the abscess has already been opened by cautery and is fully drained or if it has decreased with some decrease. Then seat the patient facing the sun, place their head on a high pillow, open their mouth, and have the servant press their tongue down with a noble instrument, shaped as follows:"
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	"And it should be made of silver or brass, and it should be thin like a scalpel."
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	"Therefore, when you press down on the tongue with that instrument and the abscess is exposed to you, grasp it firmly with your thumb and forefinger. Then take pincers and place them on it, and pull it outwards as much as possible."
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And after this, if you manage to remove some of the coats, then promptly incise it with that instrument, shaped as follows:"
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	"And it resembles forceps, but its ends are curved so that the points of each are directed towards the other. It should be made of hardened steel."
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	"But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a scalpel, shaped as follows: sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	"And having made one incision, make another according to this same method of cutting. Then wash the wound clean with fresh water."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is bleeding, wash it with water from a decoction of rosehip or myrtle leaves, similar to those remedies that have the power to stop bleeding. And continue treating it until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	"And sometimes, other abscesses appear on the glands or around those two ears. Incise them in the same manner as I have described for incising two abscesses at once."
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	"And I was called to treat a woman who had an abscess that had grown in her gland. It was dark-colored and painless, and it had already closed the mouth of the gland. The woman was breathing with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating or drinking water. She was close to death if something hadn't happened within one or two days."
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	"And the abscess had grown so much that it had formed two openings through which pus issued from two ducts."
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"Therefore I extracted it vaginally and remained in one of their orifices, and removed that [organ], and a large portion was torn away. Then I inserted my finger into where the other passage begins, then I pressed the mouth closed and held its tongue down. And then I placed the orifice in that abscess."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And you cut off a large part of it, but there was only a little blood flowing from it."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"Therefore it was the death of that woman, and she immediately began drinking water, and ate food. And I kept incising that abscess many times over a long period of time, but another abscess formed in its place, which continued to grow longer."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"Therefore I applied heat and cauterized the wound of it, then added more [material]. And then I wandered around and did not know what God had done to that woman because of me."
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	**On Incising a Swelling When It Is Abscessed**
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarr descends to the lung and is thickened and lengthened, then it is called perpendicular; but if it is at its beginning, thick and rounded, then it is called phlegm.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But if the cure is not achieved with what has been said in this section, and especially when an abscess has already formed but is still hidden and subtle, then you should incise where it becomes rounded; and if it has reached that length and is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and does not cause pain, then you should fear the incision, for there is danger to the patient in this case.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you find it according to the manner that I have indicated by its whiteness and length, then you should cause the illness to cease and press the tongue of it with an instrument whose shape is appropriate for this purpose, and then place a new bandage on top of it, draw it downwards and incise it with one of two instruments which are used in the incision of abscesses.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise more than what is appropriate to the natural term without addition, for if you incise too much, you will wound it.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And in the incision, use what has been recommended in the incision of abscesses, and heal it afterwards until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use a cautery in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery in it is not other than with hot water, and that is to place the head of the illness on the little finger, and press the tongue of it with the instrument which has been mentioned, and take some of the water which has been mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and apply it with a live coal, and do so neither too thick nor too subtle, and fill with that the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine has been placed be thus shaped as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and let the illness drip onto its side so that no saliva or spittle from the mouth of him who receives the internal medicine falls into his throat lest he choke.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then you place your hand with the medicine on the uvula and express it for about half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and settled by the biting of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, take cotton and envelop that on the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula from above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you succeed in what you want from the cautery of the wound, and then leave it alone because it will dry out and fall off after about three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and then afterwards cleanse the cautery around the wound with cotton dipped in border, and remove with that what is on the circuit of the wound from the medicine, and wash it with hot water, and dress it afterwards with embrocation, and finally with compresses until it has healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment was saved that incision and cautery were both long from fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with something so subtle that cautery and incision are not needed, because it is treated with sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, saffron, camomile, broadleaf plantain, and other similar herbs of the plants, adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an earthenware pot, and let them be immersed with sour wine, and boil; and let the earthenware pot be well covered with dough, and let there be in the middle of the pot a tube over which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor can reach the uvula above the uvula until the uvula becomes quite obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then repeat this many times until it has dried out, and make sure that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the formation of an aposteme, because it would too much stimulate the aposteme, and you should not do that, but rather await the declaration of the aposteme from the cautery.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and attach at its extremity a clod of earth, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, because the clod of earth prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVI
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of spines and of what adheres in the throat and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times adhesions are found in the peritoneum or spine of the feet or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore you must remove that which is visible of those [adhesions], upon which the eye catches sight, because as you press the tongue with an instrument beforehand, it will be declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because easily the cause attached to the throat will be forgotten through vomiting; or else have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or a bit of lettuce leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of damp sea-sponges and tie it tightly with flax, and make the patient swallow that, because when it arrives at the place where its spines are extracted, they will be removed then.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And also take an eel and tie it tightly with flax, and let it be within the table and softly be extracted; or else take a porridge and softly place it and softly bring it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if those causes which we have mentioned are not forgotten from those [adhesions], then you must use an instrument of lead made in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	"It should be larger than a small one, and at its tip there is a concavity which you will insert into its mouth with ease."
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	"And the patient raises their head upwards, and be careful that the contact of their forehead with the throat causes them no discomfort or pain."
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	"However, the patient should preferably insert it themselves, using their knowledge of the location of the cause annexed and placing it downwards, then pulling their hand up with the instrument, all according to the quantity that has been prepared so as not to forget."
Capitol .xxxix.	"The chapter is thirty-nine."
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	"On the extraction of a blood clot annexed to the throat."
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	"When the sanguissuga is medicated with what we have said in the division of cure with medicines and does not succeed, consider the hours when the throat of the patient is towards the sun, because you will then be able to grasp its tongue with the instrument which we have recommended to you."
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	"Therefore, if you grasp the sanguissuga, extract it either with a small hook or with subtle gestures appropriately."
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	"And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and appropriately place in the concavity of the cannula an iron wire heated on fire, doing this several times (until the sanguissuga is dead and removed from the throat), and abstain from giving the patient water all that day."
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	"Then appropriately take a vessel full of warm water and apply the mouth of it to that (the patient's mouth), and wash the mouth with that; and do not allow any cause or water to remain in it, but remove all the water after an hour again with your hand, for the sanguissuga immediately begins to feel the water."
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	"But if it is not forgotten what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinnamon or asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula."
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	"Do this, and then in a quarter of an hour you may give him something to drink."
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	"Ignite some coals in a bowl covered with cloth pierced at its center. Place the tip of your instrument through this hole and begin inhalation. Position the patient's mouth over the tube's end, sealing it to ensure steam enters their body until you feel the blood vessels dilate."
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	"If not, you should repeat the inhalation several times, refrain from letting the patient drink or eat salted foods and fruits, avoid drinking water, and ensure they follow this regimen diligently."
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	"This is the shape of the instrument used to remove blood clots from veins. It resembles forceps but has some curvature:"
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	"...and its tip resembles the beak of an ibis, serrated like a rasp to prevent it from slipping when grasping vessels."
Capitol .xl.	"Chapter XL"
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	"This chapter deals with the treatment of boils and their incision."
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	"Abscesses are various types, having many forms, according to their memory recalled in this book."
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	"And they differ in perforation and section of their form by two methods: one is for the species of abscesses within themselves; and what we learn about humidity."
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	"And the second method is near the places where accidents happen to the body, because an abscess that occurs in the head differs from one that occurs in the buttocks; and an abscess in the fleshy place differs from one that occurs at the joint; and each of them has its own treatment through surgery."
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"And more about abscesses, some of which should not be perforated but rather await their natural ripening or completion."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	"And there are other abscesses that must be opened when they are hard and not ripe according to their completion, such as those that are near the joints. For an abscess when it is near a joint, its essence extends into what is in its circuit, and often its ligaments or nerves of that joint become corrupted, which causes contraction of that member; or it is near a main member, and if you delay its opening until it is ripe, it can harm the main member; or it is near the buttocks, therefore open one that is not fully matured. And do not perforate it in crude condition with incomplete digestion, but rather that which is near the buttocks, so that it does not corrupt the anus and extend into the inner parts of the buttocks, and cause a fistula to be formed, or else let it heal without being opened."
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	"And so you should know the time for opening an abscess, and that is when it has ripened."
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	"And you should know that an abscess is ripe when there is cessation of pain and fever, and around the decrease in redness and swelling, and the sharp point of the abscess, and other signs."
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	"And because you should know that the opening should be made where there is purulent matter, away from the abscess itself, and coming from the summit of its swelling."
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	"And always make the opening along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the regions of the thigh or calf, and in locations of the sinews, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all locations where it is suitable; for those that are reflected, use reflection in opening them."
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	"But when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to leave its opening until digestion has fully confirmed its completion, as we have said; for if you open it before that time, the wound of the abscess will lengthen and become very dirty, and often its lips are hardened and the depth of it increases."
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	"But some abscesses must be opened across the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what that member requires."
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	"And you should make a small opening for large abscesses and wide or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses."
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	"And there are other abscesses in which it is necessary to make an incision with a curved blade and cut it when it has been made, as soon as it has reached its completion, such as those that happen in cases of dropsy and buboes."
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"And there are those that are incised with three angles of sectioning; and there are those in which it is cut like the figure of a miter leaf, such as the abscesses of the anus."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	"And there are some in which round sectioning and crescent-shaped sectioning are used, similar to those."
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	"But for those abscesses that do not present themselves as deeply seated abscesses, you should open them with a superficial or flat opening only."
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	"And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, you should open it but do not try to remove all the pus at once; take out a portion of it, then pack the abscess again the next day, gradually removing larger portions each time until it is completely emptied."
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	"And especially if the patient is a young child, woman in labor, infant, or elderly person in a state of decay; for many times the vital spirit is resolved along with the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies while being operated on."
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	"So be very careful with this chapter, and especially when opening these abscesses, you should clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; then administer the proper dressings or old rags. And if the abscess is large and the incisions are wide, then you should pack each wound separately until they heal together."
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if a portion of the blade or curvature is cut off in the abscess, you should fill it with old lint or thread made from linen cloth, just as when dressing wounds without moisture. Then tighten it on the third day and proceed to treat it with what is appropriate for wounds until it heals."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	"But if blood flows during your operation, then administer water boiled with vinegar in which a linen cloth has been soaked, and place it on the location of the bleeding many times."
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	"But if the bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and treatment, using the powders that I have recommended in many places throughout this book and its divisions."
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	"But if it is wintertime and the location of the abscess has many nerves, then you should sprinkle powders made from hot wine and oil on that location."
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders moistened with water and oil or wine and oil, all of which has been heated until the third day, as we have said. Then drain the abscess, clean it, and administer whatever is appropriate for its treatment until it heals."
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of treating abscesses in general; but according to the method of distinction, I have already mentioned how each type of abscess should be treated individually."
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Chapter XLII: Incision of Abscesses that Occur on the Neck
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck, small abscesses occur, and they are of a type that contains tunics that are made from them; and there are many species of them.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pimples, and some contain moisture like lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And among them are those that contain moisture resembling dust, similar to them; and some are stony and hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	In the incision of all of them, and in their extraction, there is nothing to fear, for you should know that their extraction does not cause great injury.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	The operation for incising them is that you express them with an instrument called the trephine, whose form is shown below, until you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then cut it open with a longitudinal incision using a superficial incision according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin the incision along line BG until line FG. Then, once the moisture has been evacuated, strip away that which contains this moisture, leaving nothing behind, for it often returns if some cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then immerse the wound in Egyptian ointment, if available, or else in water and salt. Fill it with this and leave it for another day, for with this you will corrode all that remains of its film.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	"Then repeat this operation on that area with Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if necessary, ensuring there is no remaining cause of that inflammation; then treat the wound until it is healed."
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"If an abscess contains fat knots, then you should cut into it following this shape:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	"The section should have the shape of a cross, and cut incisions between its two lips and tear it apart entirely, exerting your strength to extract the tunic that contains it."
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	"But if your attempt fails, then do what I told you first."
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	"And similarly perform the operation and treatment on an incised abscess according to what I have told you; incision over an incised abscess is easier because it contains little blood and humidity."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	"And sometimes there are cases of these abscesses that occur on the head in some people who have little humidity; this is why you should not cut into an abscess on the head of an elderly woman and tear it apart like a deaf, rough, white stone which cannot be broken down, otherwise she would be harmed by it."
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	"But in other accidental abscesses on the head that are not mentioned here, such as those that appear on children's heads or behind the ears, their incision should be a superficial one."
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	"And leave the perforation of those whose bottom is lower so that the body may be relieved from low-lying inflammation."
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	"And then treat those with what is suitable for their treatment."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII"
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Scrofula section: Those that occur in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these tumors appear on the neck, armpits and groin; sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are many and are often engendered between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, as in the nodes and tumors of the head, as we have discussed.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are many; for some are lapidary [hard and stony], others contain moisture, and some are malignant that do not yield to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which is seen to have good disposition at the Touching, whose color appearing is somewhat like the color of skin, and is swollen in every part, and not annexed with the nerve of the neck, nor with the veins, nor with the artery; and is not tender; you should incise it with a superficial incision from above downwards on the line G.B., and cut out all that is swollen, and extend the lips of the skin with forceps, or with many forceps if necessary, as we have said in tumors of the head, and extract it little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that neither vein nor nerve be incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that you do not hurt yourself with the incision, or worsen the illness, and incise only what is necessary to incise; for if you should incise a vein or artery and hinder your operation, then apply immediately to the wound powdered vitriol trisulphate or other powders which stop bleeding, and press the wound, and let it remain until the swelling of the tumor has ceased and the wound has begun to be mollified and healed.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When blood is absorbed.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore return to your operation before it is completed.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And therefore ask him about his teeth if there is any cause of the other little sores; then cut those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is on the right side of the scrophulus, cover that area so you do not cut into that scrophulus itself.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Then cover that with a cloth doubled over tightly and let it fall by itself without hurting him.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"Then fill the cloth with hot old urine that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then wash it."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"And if you cut into that entire boil, then immediately adjust the two lips of the cloth and bind it tightly so that there is no excess."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	"But if there is still excess after cutting into the boil because of its size, you should then widen the incision and draw it out, apply stitches and do what has been said."
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And for those boils that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial perforation where the point of maturity appears, and pause the perforation so that no pus escapes from underneath."
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	"And after piercing, apply ointment and compresses like those mentioned earlier, so that it burns what has come out of the boil."
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	"And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply ointment made from powdered guaiacum wood until it is healed."
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of section of the boil of an accidental aposteme within the scrotum.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancient ones called this section in the epilogue, and we have not seen anyone in our land who had it done.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their speech.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men there is danger of injury to the epididymis, which should be avoided, because if it is cut, there will be harm since all the veins and major blood vessels are located here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	However, in those who have scars on the mouth or cheek or two ears, when the illness is not on the canal, it is necessary to avoid the section of the epididymis to escape the damage that is caused by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the epididymis at three circles from the circles of the epididymis, or four with a small section across its width in those that are between two circles in quantity. The incision should be made in the skin, not in the cartilage, and this place is convenient for the section because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is afraid [of causing injury], then he should extend the cheek ligament with one hand and carefully cut the ligament towards the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any cause for that.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then incise the epididymis according to what has been recommended above; this is indicated by the swelling that appears on the canal, which is due to its rupture and the absence of voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	Leave the wound uncovered for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, approximate the two lips of the wound's ligament, and then sew only the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then apply medications that promote wound healing and tissue regeneration.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of what we have recommended is that there are some apostemes that have closed off the throat of the patient, and the illness has come on suddenly and the air passage is obstructed. Some people go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe through the wound for a little while and thus be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"The patient should be commanded to let the wound open until the evil of the illness is consumed; and this will take three days. Afterward, command it closed, and care for it until healed."
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	"I saw that a servant had taken a knife and stabbed herself in the collarbone and thereby caused injury to part of the lung. I was called upon for treatment, and when I arrived, she groaned like one dead, and I uncovered the wound and drew out blood which was flowing from it."
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	"So I confessed that she had not injured any vein nor artery, and the wind came from the wound, and I treated her until she was healed."
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	"And it did not happen to the servant that she lost her voice; however, some days later she returned for further treatment of her condition."
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	"Now you say that in the section of the epilogue there is no fear."
Capitol .xliv.	"This is Chapter XLIV."
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	"Chapter on aposteme which occurs in the collarbone outside, and is called hernia of the collarbone."
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	"This aposteme, named hernia of the collarbone, is a large aposteme according to the color of the skin, and is more common in women."
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	"And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally."
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	"In nature, it is not born to cure."
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	"And accident occurs in two ways: one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other way is like an aposteme that is formed by the rupture of an artery, and this is feared."
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	"And only those who are skilled in medicine should use cautery, not those who presume to do so without being asked."
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And if you find that it is similar to fatty tumors and not attached to any veins, then incise it like nodes and remove it with water and a scalpel from the skin and bursa; but if not, then examine its entire nature and apply appropriate treatment until it heals."
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLIV
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	"On the sectioning of kinds of nodes."
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	"I have already mentioned all the kinds of nodes and their divisions in this chapter."
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	"And it is necessary that I explain again the difference between a node and an abscess, so as to avoid confusion."
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	"Therefore I say that in an abscess there is heat and fever and intense pain until the effusion of superfetation is calmed; but it becomes complete putrefaction which then stops the fever, the pain, and the heat."
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	"But a node does not have heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains cheylymph or the liquid that is in its proper sac."
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	The skin appears dark and the onset is sudden like lightning, it occurs thus suddenly, greater or lesser, there are two species: some are fat and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are diverse as I have described in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a nodule, examine it and ask what instrument is called "intromes", according to which its form will appear in the chapter that follows.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is the method of inquiry for apostemes and all kinds of nodules: take this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the aposteme, and rotate your said instrument slowly until you know that it has penetrated the bone.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And finally, move your hand according to the size of the aposteme, and then withdraw the instrument and observe what is issuing from its trace.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the flowing moisture has been forgotten, regardless of its color, then you should incise it with a superficial section as I have said for other apostemes.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moistness issuing from the trace of the instrument, then you should know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	"Thus as you have instructed, suspend that with tongs, cut the chain from all sides with ease, and guard or preserve the skin or bag if possible, then extract that stone."
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	"However, if it has broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that stone, therefore many times we leave it there, and afterwards you can crush it into pieces so that nothing remains."
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	"For if nothing remains of it, few or many, the knot will return according to its nature."
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And if some small part remains of it, then complete the wound with some powders of sharp and strong corrosives, clean the wound, and place over that which sits in cautery, and cure that with another cure until it is healed."
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	"And if the knot is large, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what encircles it."
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	"But if there is a pulsating vein on the opposite side, or non-pulsating, then tie it and empty that place of zigzag which is vitriol, leaving it so for two days or three until the wound dries up and the ebullition of blood ceases; and afterwards return to cutting what remains of the knot."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter XLVI."
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	"Concerning the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation."
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	"Of those are the forms of the intestines, and they are of three species; of those is large, of them is medium-sized, and of them is small."
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	"The large intestine has this form:"
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	"The middle-sized intestine has this form:"
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	"The form of introducing little ones is this:"
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	"Let them be made of iron, of alloy, of pointed extremities skillfully crafted, so that they may quickly penetrate into the wounds."
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	"And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named Alberich, and one of them is called Berengar."
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	"Among those three spices, some are great, some are moderate, and some are few in number."
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	"Great experiment, form of it:"
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	"The shape of a mule, shaped like that"
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	"The shape of little experience, shaped like it:"
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	"This applies to those cases where there are bone spurs and exits and fistulas and boils due to such causes as this or others."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	"And also make them redonts, thick ones like lions, just like big needles with which the seams are stitched together, and they are made of citrine, or iron, or lead, or silver. And the best ones are those that are made of citrine."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	"And they are made of black lead, which is said to open the fistulas in whose concavity there are reflections, reflected with its levitation with those reflections."
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	"And they come in three sizes: some are long, others medium, and still others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it."
Forma del experient gran de plom:	"Form of large lead experient:"
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"Form of medium lead experient:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"Form of small lead experient:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The forms of the cones are of many kinds, for some are simple ones which have only one curvature, and they come in three sizes: large, small, and medium."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are horned ones, and they come in three types."
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among those there are some which have two curvatures, and they come in three sizes:"
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among them there are some which have three curvatures, and they come in three sizes."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And nonetheless all these things are necessary for their use."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"Form of large simple cone: Its shape is:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"Form of medium simple cone:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	A simple remedy for warts: Their form
Forma de unci orp gran:	Appearance of large warts
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Appearance of medium-sized warts
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Appearance of small warts
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Appearance of large warts having two curves
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Appearance of medium-sized warts with two curvature
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Appearance of small warts with two curves
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Appearance of large warts having three curves
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Appearance of medium-sized warts with three curvature
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Appearance of small warts with three curves
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the knives with which the warts and boils are cut and scraped, and there are three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of a large knife
Forma del scapel migier:	Medium-sized knife shape
Forma de scapel pauc:	Small knife shape
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The edges of those with which sectioning is performed are sharp and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not blunt in such a manner that there may be fear of cutting into a vein or nerve during the scraping of warts, and so that the disease may be healed and tranquility obtained by a little from the cauterization which ought to take place after the excoriation of the boil.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the shapes of spatulas (almagidas), and they come in three sizes: large, medium-sized, and small, as you can see.
La forma de magda gran:	The shape of the large spatula
Forma de magda migier:	Medium-sized spatula shape
Forma de magda pauc:	Small spatula shape
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of iron and resemble rods with which alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And they have a lateral edge pierced with a spatula hidden inside it, and in that part there goes from within outwards, whenever you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The shapes of spatulas (spatimis), which are hidden among the aforementioned devices for the perforation of boils and are not perceived by patients, come in three sizes: large, medium-sized, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The shapes of forceps with which the flow of blood is cut off and come in three sizes: large, medium-sized, and small. Here are their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	There are made of lemon peel, round with some length, and they are thin.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	You should use these types of cupping glasses that are large, medium and small in number, so that by those removed the flow of blood can happen quickly when necessary, but otherwise they are not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	Do not use these for removing blood from any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas such as the thighs, buttocks, arms, breasts, abdomen, and groin, similar to other moist fleshy areas.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	Sometimes these instruments are made of small ones similar to forceps in this form; through which blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round like this:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter XLVI
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the care of the breasts of men, which resemble those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the breasts of some men become enlarged and puffy during sleep, and they are also large and resemble those of women with prominent nipples.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if anyone has what was said above, it is necessary to make an incision in the shape of a crescent moon like this, from line B to line G, and then remove all the thickness, and then fill the wound with medicinal powder, and then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast is declining towards the sides and becoming softened by its size, like those of women that are hanging down, then it should be cut in two on both sides, with two incisions like a crescent moon shape, each containing the other at their end so that the larger line contains the smaller one, like this from line B to line G. And then remove the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, and reduce the swelling, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders as necessary in the care until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if you do not make the incision that is necessary because of the restlessness of the illness and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until what has been corrupted has rotted away, and then cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the glands under the armpits.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	"These are boils that come from beneath the skin, of a type similar to scrofula, hard, containing pus that can be extracted."
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	"And of those that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped cut according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is inside the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it for another day."
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	"And as long as the cotton remains, it should be dressed with an appropriate ointment until it heals."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	"And if the boil is of the kind called 'nodes', or scrofula, then incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula."
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	"And if the boil has spread to such an extent that it becomes gangrenous, then apply a cautery as we have said before."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter .xlix."
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	"Of the incision of boils that occur by chance or by vein."
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	"When an artery is broken and the blood coagulation is above it, then often a boil occurs. And the signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and boil are due to an artery or vein: for when a boil is due to an artery, it is long and adheres to the front of the chest; and if you press on the boil with your fingers, you hear stridor."
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	"And that which is due to a vein returns towards the centre of the body."
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	"And the incision of this boil is an error, especially in those that are on the sides of the hips, and in the armpits, neck, and many other parts of the body; and if it is large, then its cauterization with iron should be avoided, and if it is on the extremities or head, it should also be avoided."
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	"However, regarding that which occurs due to inflammation of the mouth of an artery, incise in the direction of the cord at its length; and then make a small opening with a knife near the artery, and remove the tunics until it is exposed."
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	"And then take that needle and make it penetrate into the other side; and tie the artery with double thread in two places, — which causes you to have this evidence in the extraction of both arteries which are in the temples."
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	"And then punch the place that is between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood there has been extracted and the boil dissolved."
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply a dressing in which pitch is generated so that the ligaments fall down; and also treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals."
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	"And if it is a boil due to the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what you can of the boil with the cord; and then insert the needle on the side of the place that you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and tie it with double thread so that you extract it from the other side, and then ligate the boil with two strings according to what I have told you in the liament of grape 4 of two parts with two extremities of the thread."
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	"However, if you fear that the thread may be extracted, then insert the thread with that needle on both sides of all the boil near the first incision of the needle, and tie the threads in four places."
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	"Then dry the boil in its middle until it is completely dried out; and then incise the cord's superfluity, and leave what remains tied."
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then pour over it the powder that you have submerged in wine and oil; and then apply the dressing made with calves and ointments until it is healed."
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	"Chapter on the boil that occurs due to torsion of nerves."
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	"Just as a boil can occur in an artery and vein, similarly, a boil can also occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive effort, and for similar reasons."
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	"And it usually happens in the places of the tendons or the heel, or in any place where the joints are strained."
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	"And it is a severe boil, and it resembles the color of another body, and it is in its greatest expansion without any opening when it is strongly stretched; then there is pain like stupor in it."
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	"And it is not aggregated in the front of the body; rather it is on the side of the cord, and it is swollen throughout its entire extent without going before or behind."
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	"Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be wrapped with iron, for it would cause great contraction."
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	"But those that are on the head or forehead can be incised with a spatula."
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	If the abscess is small, then treat it with a lancet and cut it open lengthwise.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, cut it open, and drain it; then approximate the edges; and close it with sutures, and dress it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter .li
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	About the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek which happens in the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Henceforth, I have seen many similar abscesses in the bellies of people and in other parts of their bodies which are called "fungal" because of their similarity to fungi; they have a thin stalk and a large head; sometimes the lips of these are turned outward, and they are either small or very large.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one like this, in whose belly there were two parts which resembled fungi very much; and they had no difference between them in color or thinness of stalk.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these were turned inward and opened, and moisture flowed from them continually.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I incised those abscesses and drained one which weighed eighteen ounces and the other which weighed six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of these is that you should consider the hours if the illness is humid, and if the color of the abscess is white, humid, with a thin stalk; then you should incise it with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready by the fire, for often much blood flows out at once; and if blood appears, cauterize that.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the illness is afraid and trembling, beware of incising with iron; rather take fresh lead foil and stretch it over that abscess, in the manner which we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And fit it closely to the narrowing of the lead foil; then do not cease stretching the lead gradually until it is completely cut and falls away by itself.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the abscess is of thick stalk, then its incision involves some cause for fear and trembling, especially that which is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible to incise the majority of them, and immediately cauterize them so that they do not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then treat him until he is completely healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And beware that you do not presume to incise an abscess which is of dark color, with little sensation, and of regular shape; for that is a cancerous one.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I bring this up in memory of cancer.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment of prominence of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Prominence of the navel is caused by many causes: either by fissures of the skin which is on the belly, and they come from it the tissue or bowel according to what happens in other ruptures; or by blood which flows from a vein or artery according to what has been said before, or by obstructed wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the skin and escape of tissue, then the color of the abscess will be similar to the color of the body; and it is painless, and appears in various locations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to an extrusion of bowel, then its location will be similar to what we have described before, but with greater diversity; and when you press on it with your fingers it disappears, and then returns; and there is a loud sound with it, and much swelling occurs at the entrance of the bath and violent turmoil.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to humidity, then it will be painless and will not disappear when you press on it with your hand, nor will it become constricted or distended.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then the abscess appears blackish declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	"If it's flesh, then it's a severe, large, hard boil that is formed in abundance."
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	"If it's due to windiness, then its touch is painful."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	"And its operation is that if the prominence of the navel is due to arterial or venous blood, or windiness; then you should refrain from treating it, because in this case there is fear and dread, as I have taught you in the chapter where I discussed boils caused by arteries and veins."
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	"And if the prominence of the navel is due to an abscess or tissue, then you should order the patient to hold their breath while lying down on their back with their arms extended. Then, feeling around the entire circumference of the navel with your thumb, order them to face upwards between your thighs but resting on their shoulders. Then circumcise the area around the navel using a broad spatula, as you had previously felt with your thumb. Next, extend the upper part of the boil using a large hook. Finally, ligature the area with strong flax or thread in a proper manner."
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	"And then cut the center of the extended boil from its base and insert your finger into that opening to search for the abscess. And if you find it adhering to the membrane, then carefully extract it and push it towards the inner parts of the abdomen."
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"And if you have found tissue, then grasp it with a hook, and incise its excess."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	"But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumcise that spot and return to your operation. Then take two needles, tie strong threads on each one, and insert the needles into the circumference you have made around the boil in a cross-like manner, penetrating them deeply. Finally, stretch the boil in four directions over the needles."
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if you wish, remove the needles and leave that space open so that the stretched skin may fall back into place by itself. Or incise that area when it has become sufficiently softened and then falls back into place, and finally cure that area with whatever is appropriate for wounds until it heals."
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	"And if the prominence of the navel is merely an accumulation of flesh due to moisture or humidity, then it is necessary for you to cut into the boil as we have said and drain out the blood or moisture that you find there. Then cure the area with whatever is appropriate and promote healing."
Capitol .liii.	"And if there is any remaining fluid in the navel, then evacuate it with a broad spatula, and then ligature the area with strong linen thread."
De curacio de cranc.	"On the treatment of cancer."
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	"We have mentioned in the division of species of cancer and its manner of approach to cure it with medicines, and that surgery is avoided for fear of ulcers; and we have said that cancer is generated in the greater and lesser omentum of the abdomen."
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	"And ancient authors have said that sometimes cancer can be in places where its eradication is possible, such as cancer located in the breast or the skin and its surroundings, which should all be removed."
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	"But when it is advanced and grave, nothing should be done near it because it cannot be healed from that place."
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	"And the operation on it is when located as we have said, to first alleviate and leave behind black bile for some time, and then drain that if there is an obvious tumor."
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	"And then prepare the patient for surgery in the location where it is located, and also prohibit during the operation some things that are harmful to him; and also remove everything from all parts with good careful excision so that there remains no cause of relapse of cancer."
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	"And let the blood flow, and do not remove it lightly, and squeeze the places, and absorb the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument which is within your power of the instruments."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is difficult for you to absorb thick blood from the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize that until the flow of blood stops, and then treat him with other remedies until he is healed."
Capitol .liv.	"Chapter 54."
De curacio de ydropici.	"On the Treatment of Hydrocephalus."
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	"We have already explained, in the division, the types of hydrocephalus and the symptoms of each type, as well as their treatment with medications."
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	The one that is treated with iron is only the species of arthritis alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanites or the species of dropsy, because this is deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this species of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not confer, then consider whether the patient has already attained debility from another illness, such as if it is in their lungs or intestines and similar ones. Then beware that you do not treat them with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the illness of excessive virtue and in it there is no other illness but dropsy alone, not child nor old, then the manner of operating on it is that you raise the patient between your arms, and the servant presses their stomach with his hand, expelling the water from below their navel towards the right side of the abdomen, and then take a sharp-pointed spatula according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Let it be double-pointed long and pointed at both extremities like a spatula, but nevertheless let there be some shortness little by little in the middle of it, so that in the operation you do not go inside the belly with it, and wound him.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, for then it is necessary that you with the section make an incision along with the navel by about three fingers' breadths on the sides, on the right side above the pubis.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of dropsy is from an illness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by about three fingers' breadths.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of dropsy is from the spleen, then your section should be on the left side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make your incision above the side towards which you wish the illness to go, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument all the way through the canal, and enter that section with it, elevating your hand with the spatula between the canal and the siphon, and you will expel it; and if the amount is like one fingernail or more.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the siphon inside so that the spatula arrives at its desired place, and this is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract it and insert an instrument whose form is thus:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or latten lion, at which on the lowest part there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its extremity is cut like this, thus like a feather:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"At the outer end of him, there is placed an armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately descends upon the instrument, therefore it evacuates as much water at once, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary at the moment, it may cause the patient's death by resolution of his animal spirit, or bring on a convulsion close to death."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"Evacuate that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what you understand about the dispositions of the patient's virtue, pulse, and complexion."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And when you remove the instrument, then retain the water which is retained by the cord that retains the tube that is over the siphon of which you are to pierce it in that manner."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And if you repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, then extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days continuously, being careful that there remains little or no water."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you extract too much water from the patient, then treat him with earth burial, and much sweating in baths, and await him long in the sun; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize over the stomach and the liver near the extraction of the water according to what I have recounted in the above mentioned."
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 50.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the treatment of children who are born with the urinary openings unperforated.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some children sometimes are born from their mother's womb with the head not fully pierced (or born feet first or in an incorrect position).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to quickly perform a perforation as soon as the child is born with a very subtle opening according to this method:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then tie off the cord with a thin lead clamp and leave it for three or four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	When it needs to urinate, remove and place it back again after it has urinated.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not tie off the lead, it is possible that urine may escape from around this opening and prevent it from closing.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	"Yet that one whose wound is narrow should be treated with a leaden clave, as we have said, for several days until it widens."
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	"Among those in whom the wound is not in its place, it should be treated by lifting it up, which happens because some men are born with the opening of the urethra at the end of the glans penis, preventing urine from flowing properly inside. During urination, they must lift the glans with their hand to direct the stream outside; this is not natural, as sperm cannot flow correctly and it is a very serious condition."
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	"The manner of performing this operation is as follows: the patient should lie on their back. Then, with your left hand, grasp the glans firmly and stretch it outwards. With a sharp spatula, make an incision in the glans at the location of the urethral opening, taking care not to cut any other part, so that the midpoint of the urethra resembles the glans itself and the wound falls into its proper place."
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	"And be sure in your operation for the flow of blood that many times it happens thus: pause the bleeding with what you have cut off and dress the wound until it is healed."
Capitol .lvi.	"Chapter .LVI."
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	"Illness of the foreskin, occurring on the head of the penis, characterized by whiteness, corruption, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the glans."
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	"Often this illness occurs on the penis, appearing as a fleshy growth."
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	"And of those, one is malignant and another is nonmalignant."
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	"Not malignant: when you have suspended it with a fine hook and cut around it until it is entirely freed; then press on it gently with Egyptian ointment; and afterwards dress the wound daily with clean linen until it heals."
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	"But if the illness is malignant, of dark color, then you should apply a caustic remedy around its opening and around its root."
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	"But if the illness is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and part of the illness is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the illness that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; then you should treat what is outside afterwards, for when you treat both together, it is not certain that the foreskin will not be injured."
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	"And if such sores occur on the genitals and foreskin which are black and inflamed, then you should remove all that is already corrupted or about to corrupt or has already begun to corrupt; and apply a plaster made of honey mixed with finely ground millet flour, barley flour, and salt."
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	"And treat it with another cure until it heals."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"But if there is a flow of blood, then apply cautery according to this method:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"For cautery is of two kinds together: one for the flow of blood and one for the plague when it has corrupted."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"And if the head of the penis is completely destroyed at once, then you should insert a lead cannula into the meat of the foreskin so that urine may flow through it."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion occurs only in those whose foreskin is too tight, and no circumcision is required over it; but when adhesion occurs due to a plague or an aposteme), you should cut with a blunt spatula until the adhesion is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed from all parts."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should cut some of the skin from the head of the penis and foreskin with a sharp spatula, for the foreskin, when very thin, can easily be pierced by its own thinness lightly."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a thread made of silk, which has been previously moistened in warm water so that they may not adhere again."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And then treat it with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter 57."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what may occur during their circumcision."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	"Circumcision is not a solution for continuity like other plagues. But since it is our operation and our will, and especially among children, it is necessary that we assign to it the best method and easiest path for preserving health."
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	"The ancient ones did not say circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws. And it is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a razor and cloths. They also use lime for binding and the nail for incising."
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	"I have already tried all these methods and found that the best cleansing is done with forceps, using lime for binding, and incising with a nail. For often times it escapes cutting too high, as the foreskin has two tunics, one of which remains beneath. It is therefore necessary to perform another incision and cause certain pain."
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	"And in the cleansing performed by apothecaries, which is done digitally and used by barbers, it is not safe to incise the tip of the member, for often times it enters into its own track."
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	"But in the operation performed with a nail, iron may be encountered and corrupt your procedure."
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	"And the foreskin of children is naturally short, and many times it appears in such a way that there is no need for cleansing. I have seen this myself."
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	"But in the cleansing that is done with forceps and binding with lime, its goodness has been experimentally proven to me, because the forceps are of proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. Therefore, when you press your hand proportionally with two sharp points, it cuts according to a comparison in one time; and there is compression of the lime with a figure containing the foreskin of the whole part without any error at all."
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	"And the first manner of operation is that you should make the child remain as still as possible if it understands a little, so that you only apply the lime to its foreskin and leave it on for another day."
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	"And appropriate for this manner is that you do everything possible to make the child happy, considering its intelligence."
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	"And it is appropriate that you keep the child between your thighs and hold it firmly prepared, so that it is not centering. And hide the forceps in your hand or behind your ear, so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	"And appropriately, place your hand on the child's penis and blow on the foreskin. Then pull it out until its head appears, and properly cleanse what has gathered there of dirt."
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	"And appropriately, tie the marked place with doubled lime and then bind a little lower with the second ligature. Then take your knife and carefully cut through both ligatures."
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And appropriately, lift the foreskin gently and expose the head of the penis. Then let the blood flow little by little, for that is better. And sprinkle powder on it and over the powder place a cloth in which egg white has been mixed with fine flour and fresh rose oil; then leave this on overnight. And care for the wound until it is healed."
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	"And the shape of the forceps used for cleansing is as follows:"
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	"They should have one side not-cutting and the other cutting, so that the tip of the nail does not come out, and let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two clenched fingers."
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	"But the error in cleansing is when you remove the foreskin entirely or cut it off unevenly."
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	"So you should stretch it out with your nail at your leisure in front of the inflammation, and cut it evenly."
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with tweezers and cut it."
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	"But if three days have passed and there is still inflammation behind the penis, then leave it until the inflammation is softened. Then carefully remove it with your nail and cut it according to what you have prepared."
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	"And protect the head of the penis so that nothing sticks to it."
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	"And then care for it with whatever plaster consolidates from the powders that have been recommended in the treatise on powders."
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	"If you cut too much of the foreskin and follow the cuts above, it will not heal properly."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"And more care should be taken by whoever performs this treatment that it is cured."
Capitol .lviii.	Capitol .58.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the Treatment of Retained Urine in the Bladder
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by stone or sand concretions, or by poverty, hardness of flesh, and similar conditions as those mentioned earlier regarding the methods of treatment in this division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and retention occurs due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over on their hands and knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place weights upon that person's back and stretch their belly from the part just above their buttocks downwards; the patient shall strain as much as they are able.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is constricted and expels the stone to the back parts, then the urine is discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the stone is not dissolved with what has been said above, then it is necessary to administer an extraction using the instrument called a "syringe," which has this form: it should be made of silver and carefully worked like a quill from the feather of a bird, thin as a ray about a palm and a half long; at its end there should be a thin tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting urine with this is as follows: take a doubled-up feather and tie it securely at its end with wool or cotton; insert the ends of the feather into the back part of the syringe, and if there are any superfluous causes of wool on it, cut them away with scissors, then insert it forcefully into the tube. Then insert the syringe vigorously with forceps, making sure that the edges are properly aligned and the opening is well lubricated with oil.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient lie on their side, bend them over at the hip, and insert the syringe into the bladder and the urethra with olive oil and warm water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the urethra; bend the urethra upwards towards the navel; then push the syringe inside that; continue pushing until it reaches the bladder, and when it enters the bladder, you will feel that the patient has reached their goal. But if this order is not followed, it is because of a twisted passage in the body.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	"Then gradually extend the bile using wool."
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	"Next, apply a catheter for urine collection and use a syringe; continue doing so until the bladder is emptied and the patient's condition improves."
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of catheterization of the bladder with instruments made of glass or similar materials that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or blood coagulates therein, or it becomes obstructed with stones, and you wish to instill waters and medicines thereinto, then use an instrument called a catheter, and this is its form:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	that at the extremity of it is rounded, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three holes: two on one side, thus making six altogether.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning it is concave, into which is inserted that which is expelled; and let it be according to its quantity added, so that whenever any cause draws forth the humidity from it, it may draw it out; and when it is expelled with this catheter, by means of which naphtha is burned in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore when you wish to introduce humidity into the bladder, insert the extremity of the catheter into the opening, and draw with that which is expelled into the holes above, for the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the extremity of the catheter into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the circumference; and then expel the humidity with that which you expel, for that humidity will quickly reach the bladder and relieve its affliction.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the fine catheter with which the bladder is catheterized is as follows:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	"Silver or lead should be used, its head resembling a small feather, inserted carefully inside."
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	"Then take a bladder of an animal, place in it the moisture that you wish to crystallize in the bladder, tie it tightly with two strong threads doubled over, and heat that moisture over the fire."
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	"And then insert the tip of the crystal into the vessel."
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	"And then stretch your hand over the bladder containing the heated moisture until the patient feels that the heat has reached the bladder."
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	"If you don't have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; pierce it all the way around its circumference; and then insert a strong thread through those holes, so that it rotates; and then attach the circle in such a way that it is attached like this, because you place inside it whatever water or liquid you wish."
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	"And then tie that to the instrument and proceed in the same way as you have done with the bladder, until the moisture reaches the bladder."
Capitol .lx.	"Chapter LX."
De extraccio de peyra.	"Of removing stones."
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	"We have already discussed in the division [of urine] the types of stones and their treatment with medications, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and their symptoms."
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	"We have said that in this stone, operation can be performed with hand, and section."
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	"This stone properly generated in the bladder is the one still present in it."
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	"And you are thus recounting this with clear exposition and abbreviation."
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	"So it is said that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children. Among its signs are: urine exiting from the bladder resembles water in its fineness and appears cloudy in color; the patient frequently scratches their genitals, sometimes even with a pen, and often has an erection. And with this condition, the anus is also affected in many cases."
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	"And it would be easier to heal children of that disease who have attained fourteen years of age; and difficult cure in the elderly."
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	"But among the young, it is more moderate than in older individuals."
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	"And for that person from whom the stone is large and the cure is harder to achieve. But if it is small, then it is favorable for that condition."
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	"So when we come to the treatment of this condition, it is necessary at the beginning that we cleanse the patient with a cautery which extracts all the opening present in his testicles. For that opening sometimes hinders the expulsion of the stone during its investigation."
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	"And moreover, let the patient be taken with his feet and shaken up in such a way that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or what is left of it."
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	"And furthermore, let that plaster be prepared between the thighs, and its parts applied to its things, in order that the bladder may become entirely inclined towards those parts."
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	"And apply that remedy and all remedies for this condition."
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	"So if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly cut open over it."
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	"And if you cannot grasp it with your fingers completely, then you should anoint your left index finger with oil if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a grown-up man. And introduce that [finger] into his anus."
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	"And search for the stone until you find it with your fingers."
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	"Little by little, turn that [stone] towards the neck of the bladder."
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	"And then press upon it with your finger, and expel it outwards from the place where you made the incision."
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	"And command the minister to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the scrotum upwards with his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the cord that is below the scrotum, on the side where the incision is being made."
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then introduce a spatula through the incision of which this is the method:"
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	"And cut through that which is between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle of it, leaning towards the left side; and let the incision be over that stone and your finger be inside the anus. And let the incision be transverse so that its exterior opening may be wide and its interior opening narrow according to what is possible for the size of the stone, and no more than that. For if you press too much with your finger which is in the anus during the operation, the stone becomes forgotten without difficulty."
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	"And know that among stones there are some which have angles and edges, for their expulsion is made difficult because of that."
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	"And regarding those which resemble an acorn, being round and small in size, their extraction is easy."
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	"So if it is that one with angles and edges, adjust it into the fissure."
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	"And if it is not thus extracted, then you should press upon it, or exert pressure upon it gently using the end of a suitable tool like a file with which you press upon the stone, and do not let it escape from there; or introduce a thin curved instrument through that [stone]."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	"But if you cannot press upon it, then widen the passage a little, and if you see blood flowing, cut that [stone] with dissolved vitriol."
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	"But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you should press your hand against the mouth of the bladder and cut upon it. Then gently push a little further down towards that [stone]; and do likewise if there are many."
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if there is a very large stone, it would be ignorance to cut upon it with a large incision, for the patient encounters one of two outcomes: either he dies, or he suffers from continuous dripping of urine afterwards because that place does not heal properly."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	"But once expulsion has occurred, remove the stone from there with forceps, or use tongs to extract it in pieces."
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	"So once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment made of aloe and dragon's blood, and press upon it."
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	"And apply a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	"And then have the patient lie on his back, and do not remove the stitches until the third day."
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"And when that [wound] has healed, wash it with warm water and much oil, and then dress it with ointment made of diachylon and ointment made of diaphoretic plants until it is completely healed."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	"But if inflammation and corruption occur in the wound, and it appears as if blood has congealed there, then urine is forbidden for him (and this is known by the exit of blood mixed with urine). Then introduce your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains it causes irritation of the bladder and putrefaction."
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then wash the wound with sour wine, water, salt, and with anything else that is appropriate for its cure until it is completely healed."
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	"And it is necessary during all the time of the treatment that you lie on both sides and apply the medicines prescribed upon the wound."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and its expulsion causes difficulty with urination, then treat it as follows: use what I have mentioned before that you should do before resorting to cutting, for many cases are cured by this treatment; and here is how you should proceed:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	"From triangular exterior part, sharp, fixed in wood."
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	"And then remove the stone, and tie that ligature around the bladder to prevent it from returning to the vesicle."
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	"Then carefully insert the iron into the urethra, gently piercing until the sound reaches that stone."
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	"Then rotate the sound gently with your hand within that stone little by little, and continue the perforation until you feel it penetrate to the other side; for urine is now being released."
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	"Then press your hand over that which remains of the stone from its beginning outside the urethra, because it is crushed, and is forgotten with the urine, and the patient is healed."
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	"If this procedure cannot be completed for any reason that prevents it, then ligate one side of the stone and another above it."
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	"Then cut the stone in that urethra between two ligatures."
E aprop extratz aquela.	"And then extract it."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"Then untie the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood that has formed in the wound."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	"It is not necessary to ligate one side of the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above is only to ensure that when it is untied near the exit of the urethra, the thread returns to its place and closes the wound."
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	"And for that reason, it is necessary when tying the thread above to elevate the thread towards its beginning above, so that it may return completely and close the wound as we have said."
Capitol .lxi.	"Chapter LXI."
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	"For removing a kidney stone from women."
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	"A kidney stone in women occurs rarely."
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	If a stone appears in any of those (places), then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by various methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of these is that when a woman conceives while she is menstruating.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second one is that you cannot find a virgin maiden who discovers if she has sex with her husband when she is menstruating or is married.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third one is that you cannot find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation of the handmaiden.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth one is that the place of cutting for a stone in women is far from the stone itself, so that a deep incision is needed, and this causes fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity drives you to this, then you should take a woman midwife who is very skilled and not afraid.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then look for a doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a woman midwife who is experienced in the matter of women's diseases, or a woman who has been trained in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore have that person present, and command her to do everything that you order her from the examination of the stone at the beginning. This is so that she can check if the woman is a virgin, and then put her finger in the woman's anus to feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Then if she finds it, make that person leave her finger there, and then command her to incise on top of that place.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the sick woman's vagina and examine for the stone. For she should place her left hand on the bladder and grasp it with good precision.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	"Therefore, if that is found, then carefully remove that from the opening of the bladder to the parts of its exit with a summons of its power until it reaches the root of the thing."
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	"And also insist on that opposition of the might of the eye near the root of the thing, wherever it may be stopped and especially keep the stone in that part, so that it is not removed from the stone by some servant."
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	"And the section should be small at the beginning. And also introduce the probe into that section and if you feel the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which you know the stone will pass through."
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	"And know that species of stones are many: some are small and large, lion-shaped and sharp, long and round, and have branches."
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	"So you should know how many species there are of it through what you indicate about what you want to do."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	"And if you see flow of blood, adjust in the location of vitriol stone and let it sit there for an hour until the blood is absorbed, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled."
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	"And be sure that you prepare for yourself the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be helped by them in your operation."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	"And if you see flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery which is incised, then you pause powder over the location and strangle that with pulverized oak bark and stricture descent, but do not repeat it; and let the stone be and do not extract it, for greatly the patient will die."
E aprop cura la plagua.	"And also cure the wound."
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	"Therefore when the sharpness of the blood has diminished somewhat over several days, and the location becomes painful, then you should resume your operation before the stone is expelled."
Capitol lxii.	"What follows is chapter sixty-two."
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	"Regarding hernias that occur suddenly."
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	"A sudden hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white coat which is left by the cord of the genitals containing the intestine, and it is called a white coat."
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	"And sometimes it occurs in the proper pancreatic tissue which nature prepares at the opening of the intestine, before it has any connection with the other intestines; and this is the cord of the genitals between the white coat which we have mentioned, and nothing more than a kind of bag."
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	"The cause of this hernia is weakness in the genitals which allows the aforementioned matter to protrude and sometimes occurs due to a sudden blow on the genitals."
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	"And this moisture has many colors, for its color declines towards yellowish or reddish or brown, or black and earthy, or it is watery white, and this is the most common."
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	"And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water occurs are as follows: if it is in the white coat mentioned above, then the swelling appears rounded and elongated like an egg shape, and the genitals appear because the moisture contains them on all sides."
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	"And if the moisture is in the proper pancreatic tissue, then the swelling appears rounded at the opening of the intestines, and for this reason it is estimated to be another hernia."
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	"And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white coat, then there is a sensation of pressure from both sides."
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	"If you wish to know the color of the moisture, then expose the color of the moisture in the swelling with thin membranes whose form is preceded; and according to what is expressed in the traces of these membranes, judge what is inside it."
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	"Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be flebotomized if possible, and let the body of the swelling be filled."
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	"And also let him lie on his back slightly elevated for a little while, and apply moist cloths to it."
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	"And also sit on the left side of it, and command the ministrant to stand on the right side of it; let him extend his hand towards one or two fingers' breadth from the cord of the genitals and the opening of the anus."
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	"And also take a broad spatula and cut through the cord of the genitals at its middle point for some length towards the penis."
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	"And let the incision be made according to a straight line equidistant from the skin that covers the genitals, until it reaches the white coat encompassing it."
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	"And remove that, and observe it, and take care that you do not incise it; and your removal with which you remove it should be done gently as if it were suspended with an egg and carefully examine it according to its quantity as much as possible."
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	"And also pierce the full coat of water with a wide perforation, and remove all the water."
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	"And also separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the coat at its sides; do not touch the cord encompassing the genitals, and incise the coat in this manner as much as you are able."
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	"And incise it with its entirety or in pieces, especially on its left side more subtly; for if you do not examine the incision of it diligently, there is no certainty that the water will not return."
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	"But if the swelling proceeds from that outside its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the coat, return it inside that, and also join the two lips of the cord of the genitals with sutures, and also dress it as the other wounds until it is healed."
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	"And if you find the swelling corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to ligate those vessels that are near the suspenders, and remove the swelling, and also dress it with what we have said."
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	"But if water accumulates in two places separately, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore incise that part according to what you have done in the other equally, and if it appears to be an operation, then do it."
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	"And also you should wipe away the blood, and then enter into the incisions wool immersed in oil or rose oil. And pause outside with other wool that you have immersed in wine and oil, and spread it over both genitals and the opening of the anus; and place doubled cloths and powders on top, and bind them on according to this form:"
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	"and also two cloths should be taken and filled with wool carded in this way; and their extremities where they are bound with cotton or wet wool should be made, and they should be tightened with a strap in the breeches of the trousers, and one extremity should take hold of the buttocks inside to the other, and the second one should take hold at the opening of the anus, and two extremities on both sides and two others on both knees, and all tightening should be adjusted in the breeches of the trousers."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of an incision with iron; and it is that you take a subtle knife-shaped cautery and incise the cord of the genitals with it, and it is ignited according to what we have recommended until the white coat containing the water is discovered, and then you take a cautery in this way:"
e es asemblat a letra greca.	"And it resembles the Greek letter lambda."
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	"Then pierce that coat with it and ignite until all moisture is evaporated."
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	"And also extend the coat with forceps and remove it with forceps, and burn it with an ignited subtle cautery. And incise it as much as you are able until you eradicate all of it. And take care that the swelling is not touched by the fire."
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	"And know that this operation is safer and more distant from bleeding than an operation with incision, and it is better."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	"But if you encounter difficulty with aposteme during incision or cautery, or bleeding occurs, then it is necessary for you to treat the difficulty that occurs according to what is said."
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	"But if the disease is fearful and does not wait for a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what I recommend. And this should be done when you are certain, according to what we have said about the indications, that that hernia is hydrocele."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	"Then it is necessary for you to make an incision on some elevated swelling. Then pierce the aposteme in its lowest part with a wide spatula and continue the perforation according to the length of the body."
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	"And let the aperture be wide enough to drain all the water."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	"And also pause on the site of the incision and bind it and leave it, so that the remaining water may flow out."
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And dress it until the wound is healed."
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	"But if there is difficulty in the evacuation of water at that time, you should pierce it. And this happens only when the white panniculus in the opening of the wound obstructs and prevents the exit of water. Therefore, it is necessary for you to insert into the wound a trocar or instrument with which water is extracted from hydroceles, whose shape is described above; or adjust a small tube in the aperture of the wound."
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	"Know that water returns, and is gathered around about six months or thereabouts; and when it is gathered, then it should be pierced according to that manner, for the patient will thus pass their days."
Capitol .lxiii.	Here comes another sentence:
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	"Chapter on Fatty Hernia and Its Treatment."
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	"You should know that in cases of this type of hernia, there is great danger of death in the larger displacements. Therefore, it is better to dismiss the operation and save the patient by other means."
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	"And you remember the operation in that case and the appearance of the gangrene."
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	"Therefore, it is said that gangrene occurs in the bodies of those whose veins are compressed and this happens for many reasons: either from acute severe inflammation, which flows into the veins, or from injury."
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	"And the color of gangrene follows the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain. It is severe gangrene."
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	"And pale, dry gangrene is lapidified, whose color is dark and insensitive to touch."
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	"And sometimes it occurs from obstruction of the arteries or from inflammation of those arteries, as soon as it is perceived by memory, or from inflammation of veins."
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	"But what occurs from inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of gangrene when you press on it with your fingers, and there is no need for that touch."
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	"But what occurs from inflammation of a vein does not disperse due to compression with the aforementioned fingers."
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	"And it is possible that on this type of flesh, sectioning may be done, and also on other flesh; and if you incise the cord of veins, extend the wound upwards to its parties, remove the cistern white matter and free the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off and incise the suspensory ligament entirely from all parts of the wound."
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	"Therefore, if the flesh is already consolidated around that wound, then you should remove it and incise into it."
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	"And if there is adhesion within some cause of the cistern or between what is between the vessels, then you should free all that adhesion and incise it with a rounded cut."
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if there is new flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind it, then you should incise all that which belongs to it and remove the wound as we have said."
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine; and apply that cure with another appropriate one until it heals."
Capitol .lxiv.	"Chapter LXIV."
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	"Of the treatment of a hernia that is from the gut."
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	"A hernia is gangrene wrapped in some wrapping resembling a bud with softening of the testicles. It is difficult to perform movements and walking because of the illness."
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	"And in the treatment of this condition, it is done by fear of what preceded it."
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	"Nevertheless, we should speak operation on that according to what was said before."
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	"I say you should place the patient upon an elevated cushion. Then peel back the scrotum from the testicles on both sides. Next, tie the cord of the genitals with your fingers and bells that are proven on the rope."
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	"Then incise with a sharp lathe knife through a transverse section on the right side of the vessels where they are uncovered."
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	"Next, carefully extract from each part as we have told you in the case of removing an arrowhead, which is located on the temples."
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	"Then insert in those places a double-threaded needle, tying the first thread at the initial point where you saw blood, and tying the second thread again at the last point."
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	"Then cut that place open in a straight line along the length of the body and remove what has accumulated there from the putrid and corrupted moisture."
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	"And then treat the wound with remedies for other wounds where you wish healing to be produced, because it is not harmful if some vessels that are not essential to either of the testicles are cut."
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	"But if blood flows from all the vessels, then the testicles must be removed or they must be cauterized along with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the cutting of the vessels. And they must be stitched up or cauterized so that there is no further harm from them."
Capitol .lxv.	"Chapter LXV."
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	"Of the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia."
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that occurs in the groin extended over the abdomen, on the side of the ring of the navel of the belly, through which some of the intestines descend from that opening."
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	"And this rupture is either of the groin itself or of an excavation made therein, and these two types occur for many causes: either from a blow, or from a fall, or from hard labor, or from heavy lifting, or from some other cause."
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	"And the sign of this is that when it occurs from an extension of the groin, it happens little by little over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. And it appears as an abscess enclosed within the belly because the groin squeezes the intestine."
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	"And the sign of this is that when it occurs from a rupture of the groin, there is suddenly violent pain at first; and it appears as an abscess different from the usual one near the groin, and this is due to extrusion of the intestine. And the body of the hernia extends towards the outside of the groin."
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	"And sometimes the intestines are forgotten within the hernia and this is called an incarcerated intestinal hernia or 'umbilical hernia'."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	"Sometimes it occurs with flatulence, sometimes it runs in the split intestine, and here it is retained, causing great harm to the patient; sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed."
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	"It is feared in the treatment of this illness with iron that cauterization should be avoided in that area."
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	"In performing the operation on that area, command the patient to reduce the intestine with their hand into the hollow of their hip if they obey the return movement, and promptly place your elbow on their thigh between your hands, elevating their hips."
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	"Then pull the cord that secures the cord of the testes upwards, and incise the cord of the testes entirely along its length; then insert two hooks on both lips of the incision according to what you may need to open the incision with those."
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	"And if during the incision, it is possible for you, that part should be forgotten by the hook."
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	"Then strip that sheath which is on both sides of the cord of the testes until the white fibrous membrane of each part is uncovered."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	"Then insert your finger in that place where the testes are located, between the white fibrous membrane which is on both sides of the hook, and between the second sheath, and remove any adhesion that may be there behind the hook."
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	"Then hold the cord of the testes with your hand on both sides, and at the same time extend the white fibrous membrane upwards with your left hand, elevate the hook with the sheath to the part of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the hook above, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it with abundant saline solution."
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	"And check carefully with your fingers that there is no cause of the vas deferens enclosed in the white fibrous membrane."
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	"But if you find any cause, then immediately ligature it on both sides."
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	"Then take a needle with a thick thread of four threads, and insert it through the last part of the sheath, which is below the cord of the testes where the incision was made; then cut the ends that protrude from the thread so that there are four threads left, and tie some of them together in the manner of a knot, and ligature the sheath with those two parts on both sides of the cord of the testes tightly."
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	"Then tie the ends of the threads and ligature them tightly, making sure that none of the vessels that were cut cannot cause any cause for an abscess to occur here."
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	"Then tie another ligature in the same manner as the first one, about three fingers away; then these two ligatures leave the sheath which is on both sides of the cord of the testes the length of a finger, and cut everything that remains according to its roundness, and remove the hook."
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	"Then cut in the part below the cord of the testes through an incision where blood and serum can flow out, as we have mentioned before."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	"Then apply lanolin immersed in oil to the wound; then tie the ligature that we have mentioned (and sometimes cauterize the white fibrous membrane which we mentioned near the incision of the bleeding point, because sometimes it happens like this); and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself."
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	"But if the ligature does not fall off, then hot water should be applied to it and paused until it falls off according to what we have said."
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the wound with other treatments for wounds until it heals."
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter LXVI
De hernia ventosa.	Of ventral hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, none have been cured by burning it with an iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	"Firstly, it was said that this is done as we have recounted in the case of a hernia with wine; namely, to tie the vessels near the section with gentleness, and then dry in the middle part around the abscess using what operates that."
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	"And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvii.	"What is Chapter 67?"
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	"Regarding the dissection performed on eels."
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	"Sometimes there are divisions or ruptures in eels as we have mentioned, and they become prominent at that location."
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	"And give no reason for the intestines to the gene (horse), and if you do, it is little; and it returns at all times."
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	"But if the time is prolonged with this, there will be an adjusted fissure in the caecum where the intestine enters the caecum; and this occurs because of the extension of the caecum which is present in eels as we have mentioned. This causes the caecum to become stretched, softened, and a swelling appears."
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	"And its treatment is with cautery as described earlier."
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	"And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: the sick eel should be placed on its back between the two thighs of a man, and then dry the location of the ruptured swelling with a section made along the width about three fingers wide."
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	"And then strengthen the white caecum which is below the backbone so that it becomes visible."
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	"And then take a reed and place it on the prominent location of the caecum, and press it against the front of the belly."
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	"And then cut the two prominent locations on the extremity of the reed over the caecum, and adjust them with a suture one to the other."
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	"And then remove the extremity of the reed, and do not insert it into the caecum completely, nor extend the wound, nor other causes such as those which you should know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia."
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	"And then treat it with the treatment of ulcers, and when you incise the membranes, clean them and restore the ulcer so that it is consolidated; for the caecum contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted."
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	"And cautery is better in this location because it is closer to health."
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXVIII
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Concerning the softening of the backbone of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Very often, the backbone of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between them is also softened, and this condition deserves attention.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for someone who wants to treat this condition to make the patient lie on his back and cut all the softened backbone that is over the natural backbone, and then adjust two lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut at the beginning of the softened backbone's excess with three or four cuts and close it with firm sutures.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then incise between the sutures, and treat it with the treatment of other ulcers until it heals and the membranes fall off.
Capitol .lxix.	De la cusida de la codena dels testiculs.
De castracio.	Castration
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is forbidden by our law, but for some reason I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two manners: the first is so that it may be known in the science of medicine when one asks about its treatment; and the second manner is because we often have need of castration in other beasts for our benefit, such as with mules, oxen, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And thus it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by incision or by cutting open.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by incision, the method of operation is that we make the beast lie down in cold water until its testicles become softened and relaxed, and then they may be cut off.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And therefore take those [testicles] with your hand before they are resolved or appear outside the touch of the skin.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by cutting open and removing, you should hold the beast and press on the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then cut the suspension ligament, and make an incision above each testicle with one stroke so that both emerge at once.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those [testicles] off as soon as they have emerged.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave anything on the scrotum except for a small piece of skin over the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration by incision is better than that done by cutting open and removing because it leaves some cause of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then dress the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways. The first is when something appears like a female vulva between the testicles in place of the space that should be there.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	Sometimes urine flows from that place where the testicles are connected.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women there is only one kind: it is when the vulva appears on the pubis like two testicles of a man, with a little opening towards the posterior, just as the male penis has and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And there are three types of treatment for this condition: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary to cut those joined flesh parts until the flow of that emission stops, and then dress them with the treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind in men where urine flows from that place where the testicles are connected, there is neither treatment nor operation to be done there.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	"Of lentils and flesh, prominent are those of women."
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"Lentigo is often adjusted onto natural causes which are expressed and made legal by the regard; sometimes it is magnified in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men, especially during coitus."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	"Therefore you must remove the excess of lentigo with your hand or with ointment and rub it in."
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	"And do not forget to finish by rubbing it especially on the forehead, so that there is no bleeding of blood."
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	"And finally cure that with a remedy for boils until it is healed."
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But born flesh is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother's womb until it fills it up; therefore it often appears outside according to the similarity of coal (and for this reason some first called it “lizard disease”); therefore we must rub it like lentigo, and cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the remedy for alopecia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	It is advisable that the womb of the woman is not pierced or drawn out.
E es o natural o accidental.	And whether it is a natural or an accident.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	An accident is when the illness has preceded it, and that is done either by flesh not properly adjusted, or by a thin or thick skin.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is done either in the front of the mother's belly, or on her sides, or above or below the navel, and it inhibits conception, pregnancy, and childbirth; and it particularly inhibits menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made through examination of the mother's womb, if the dilation is apparent; but if it is not apparent, then you will search for it with your fingers or with a speculum.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the dilation is due to thin skin and it is apparent at both lips of the vulva, then you will cut and tear that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And if there is pressure on both labia majora, then you should apply pressure with your fingers at the thickest part of each one.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And when the woman is on her back with her legs spread wide, then you will spread both labia majora with force until that thin skin is broken and the dilation is opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take some linen and oil and place it on the location, and press gently with your hand for a little while so that the incision does not close up.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the skin is thick and hard, then you must incise it with a broad knife or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the dilation is due to inflammation, then suspend that with an ointment and incise it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"And if you have medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as achachatia and dragon's blood, use them mixed with egg white."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	"And then insert a wide lead cannula so that the wound is not lightly sealed."
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	"Keep it on for a few days and apply boiled water to cleanse it."
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	"And then treat it with another consolidation cure until it is healed."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	"Sometimes, especially in the case of other flesh wounds, this method should be followed."
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	"But if it is a hard boil, make sure that there is no contradiction with iron in any way."
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids and prolapse of the rectum that occurs in women's genitals.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are a condition of many veins around the anus, from which much blood flows continuously. And when old hemorrhoids form clots, they become hard.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"And as I have already said in the division of species and symptoms of these, I will say here which ones receive treatment and which do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and hard clots when they are at the entrance of the anus and cannot be felt, in those cases there is no treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are at the opening of the anus and can be felt, those are the ones that can be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must make the woman lie on her back and extend her buttocks with both hands or a rough cloth, and then incise them with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle on it the flows of blood from one of the incised powders without biting it, such as cassia and similar drugs.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then make her fast for an hour, and then apply a hot compress to that area.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make her take a decoction of sumac and oak bark and cranberry seeds and walnut shells and similar drugs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take some barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with that mixture to apply on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is cut off, it's good. But if not, then adhere with two leeches and scarify the breasts without bloodletting.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take some wool and soak it in juice of cilantro or in juice of sage or in juice of agrimony with red wine, and apply it to the location; and then dress the location with a poultice until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if there are hard clots that require harsh treatment, you must incise what appears of those according to what I have said in the chapter on hard clots.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And dress it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of the perforation of a haemorrhoid accidentally in the anus.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of apostumes happen accidentally in the anus, such as cancer and stone apostume and ulcerous and adherent and creeping and fistulous hemorrhoids and raw ones and hard clots and others.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already spoken of these illnesses and their species and their symptoms, and the treatments for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary that I say in this treatise about the cauterization of a cauter that appears in the anus when it comes from those apostumes that are curable, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then you must consider if the pain of the aposteme at its beginning is sharp with percussion and swelling and fever, and if it becomes reddened and if you can feel it, then do not cut it open with a perforation, but dress it with what helps with ripening until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you must make the woman lie down on two pillows; and she should recline on her back and adjust her feet towards the side of the bed below the belly, and spread out her thighs, and pause her arms away from her breasts, and tie each thigh with a cloth in an appropriate manner.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife should stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which the incision of the anus is made, whose shape will come in those cases that are mentioned below.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you should stand at the back of the woman's buttocks, and that only as much of the instrument enters into the anus as the width of the anus, so that it does not enter too deep and harm the illness.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the width of the anus, then you must pause powders on the texture of the anus so that it hinders the entrance of any instrument into the anus.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary that you pause the lever that runs in the instrument on the right side and above, so that the one who administers the instrument holds it and turns the lever until the incision of the anus is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the excision appears and is touched with the hand and it is loose and moist, then you must dry it quickly with the head of a spoon.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sickness is evacuated, then you must pause in the wound a wick soaked in rose oil or verdigris oil, which has some astringency, and pause the cloth on the section in the width of the anus.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And then cover the anus with clean wool immersed in water in which mallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be dressed properly for two days with a poultice suitable for that purpose until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the anus and the wound are washed in this way: they are washed with water and honey, and sometimes with water in which rose leaves or long-stalked comfrey have been boiled, and then it returns to the poultice.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the anus and swollen, then it is necessary that you abstain from the cure of it with iron, but dress it with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter LXXV.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat the breech births when they come out in an unnatural position.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and it is that when you see the woman pressing down below and desiring to smell the air, and then she is relieved by what comes out above her, and rushes quickly to expel the child, then you know that this birth is according to nature, and it is the expulsion of it with its head coming out first, and the second one hanging or suspended from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the belly of it be pressed so that the child comes out lightly when its head comes out first and thus the second one comes out clean from all impurities with good cleansing.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is otherwise than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the child comes out with its feet first and its body comes out before its head and its feet, and one of its hands or even one of its legs or its belly comes out first, and thus it turns with its back upwards, such figures are blameworthy.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all these matters and to guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And here I show you all figures of those and what kind they are by which it may be understood through this and be placed on this.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When heat is exhaled upon the head due to natural greediness, and it is strong in women and difficult to bear, especially when their virtue has already weakened, then they become feverish. This occurs because women hold on to resentment, and they evaporate the congestion from their chest with fenugreek cooked with oil.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then insert the syringe between her thighs and fill it with that second liquid or else dig with your nail into that which is inside her and remove whatever humidity there is.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the woman's belly until the fetus emerges.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not come out, then it is necessary that the woman be smeared with dough made from chickpeas and dough made from fenugreek with cumin.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command it to be smeared on her and have her sneeze with conditions; and cover her mouth and nose with something for an hour, because the fetus will soon be forgotten.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both hips of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then you must reduce them little by little with ease.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her legs up, and strike the chair against the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall due to the shock.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the hips are not turned correctly and the fetus dies, then cut them open and remove the remnants of the fetus or else tie its body with cloth and remove it gently, because it will soon be forgotten.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	About the emergence of the embryo on its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	"When the sheet is on his feet, then you must push those up and soon turn the sheet small, and soon tie that, and soon take one foot of him and stretch that little by little."
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"After he has entered between the sheets, then you must command him to expel his breath, and make him sneeze if possible, for sometimes he may forget it if God wills."
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	"And if he does not forget what we have recommended, then you should slowly return the sheet between his legs until you cover him according to nature's figure, because sometimes he will now forget it with a light sigh."
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	"And if it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take some gum arabic and dissolved gum, grind them well in the mortar with good percussion, and soon line with that the mouth of the woman, lower down on his belly."
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	"And soon make him drink hot water, until he reaches the hypochondria [i.e., the area below the ribs]."
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	"And when the parts of his body are anointed, then make him inhale the vapor of myrtle and soon cover him with that."
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	"And when the sublimation has lasted an hour, then place it on a sieve, and soon make him sneeze and stretch his mouth open, and take that away, and press the lowest part of his belly with light pressure, because he will soon forget it."
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	"The sigh comes out upon his teeth and his mustache."
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	"When the sigh comes out according to this form, then gradually insert his mustache; and soon let the woman sit on his neck, with her weight hanging downwards, and those lying on the bed, completing his mustache."
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	"And soon press gradually on his belly, and soon take out what is between his buttocks from the ears until it is prepared in the lowest part."
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	"And if he does not forget it, then take his buttocks and shake them with violent motion, and soon press what is on the hypochondria gradually until he pushes it up to the parts above."
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	"And soon insert his mustache and swallow little by little what comes out, and order the woman to squeeze herself until he forgets it."
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	"The sigh comes out laterally from one of his mustaches."
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	"Let him be inserted into the reduction of his hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman up and let her go."
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	"And if she cannot go, then let her lie on the bed, and strike his sides with violent percussion, and soon administer to him remedies which are sweet and moistened with mucilages."
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	"And if childbirth has come, then let her sit on a sieve, and soon study the reduction of the hand, and swallow what comes out according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze, and order him to press himself until it is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	"The sigh comes out over his neck with his mustache expanded and his face turned towards his mother's side."
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	"It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the child and soon turn it little by little, and bring it out with ease."
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	"And when it is out and how much has been swallowed, then pause on the child's head what we have recommended of oil and mucilages."
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	"And soon order him to move little by little, and when you have done that, then let her sit on a sieve, and command her to be inclined towards the right side, and soon order him to be pressed; and make her sneeze with condition."
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	"Exit of the prepared fetus onto the side."
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	"When they horrify from the mother according to this manner, consider, and soon insert your second nail into it until it is evacuated of humidity."
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	"And if the child is suspended on his face and neck, then insert your second nail into its belly-button, so that it is not retained and dies."
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	"And soon push the child into its parts inside until you pause it where necessary, and order the woman to press herself several times, and he will forget it with light sighing, if God wants."
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	"Exit of twins or multiple fetuses."
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	"Know that very many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is strange and difficult to endure. But such things happen naturally, not by chance."
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And count those [fetuses], whether they are multiplied or not, one second nail for each one, and separate them by the navel cord. Distinguish them by the ligaments in the umbilical cord of each one. And sometimes they are forgotten like this as if there were only one fetus with a light natural sighing, but sometimes they are expelled with an unbearable sigh like we have recommended."
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	"And if some of them are difficult to deliver and arrive at what we have said about the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have recommended."
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	"And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, but also with tardiness, and inserts it according to all its figures as it was prepared for her by bringing about salvation."
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	"Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborted."
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	"Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten are formed in the mother's womb, and it has been verified that one woman aborted seven, and another threw out all ten, which was caused by the measurement of the glorious sages."
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	"And therefore it is necessary that the midwife know how to discern this small semblance, and thus pause when it is necessary."
Capitol .lxxvi.	"Chapter Seventy-Six."
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	"Of the extraction of the dead fetus."
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	"When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it does not come out easily, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then consider whether the woman is of sound virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents that cause harm to her."
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	"Then let the woman be placed on her back with her knees raised and her head leaned downwards, and her hips lifted."
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	"And the minister should hold her from both parts or have her tied on the bed so that her body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus."
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	"And soon you moisten the mouth of the mother with warm oil and mucilage of marshmallow, fennel, and linseed."
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	"And soon the midwife anoints her hand with these oils and mucilages, and soon inserts her hand gently into the womb, and soon seeks with her hand where the nails are in the fetus."
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	"And locate it conveniently there: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be removed from its head, and soon you place your nails in its eye sockets or neck or mouth or palate or beard or collarbone or near the ribs or hypochondria."
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	"But if it is to be removed from its feet, then in the groin or the middle of the back."
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	"And hold the nail with your right hand and place its curve in that location between the fingers of the left hand and insert your hand gently and place the nail in one of those locations we have mentioned until you reach the cause of the obstruction."
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	"And soon place and keep another nail, or the third if necessary, so that there is equal traction and not excessive extension according to its rightness alone."
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	Answer: Then it is necessary that all parts be opened, so that the discharge of the fluid may be eased as it is done in tooth extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	Answer: And it is necessary that the water which is between them be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife must anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully insert them and turn them in order to remove what has been retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Answer: Therefore if the birth of the child is delayed, then the hands should be washed with clean water and dried well; and do this until all the child has come out.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	Answer: But if the hand is extended beyond the other one and it cannot be reduced by pulling it back through the narrowness of the opening, then cloth should be wrapped around that one; and carefully cut off that one until all of it has come out, and cut it at the junction of the hand or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	Answer: And do the same for the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Answer: But if the head of the child is large or the opening is narrow at the time of birth, or the head is in the watery cavity, then it is necessary to insert between those parts the spatula bone with its sharp edge and cut the head open and remove the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" whose shape will be shown along with other instruments in the chapter which follows this one.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Answer: And do the same if the child has a large head by nature; and then it is necessary to cut that with an alembic or use the alundat as we have said before, and especially remove the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	Answer: And if the head is extended but stuck below the forklike bone, then it should be cut until the moisture in the pit has drained out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Answer: But if there is nothing complicated or obstructing the exit, then you should cut the head until you can easily get it out.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	Answer: And if the left side of the belly is inflamed or in a dropsical state, then you must perforate it until the fluid inside it has run out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	Answer: But if the child is lying on its feet, then its attraction [to come out] will be light and its direction towards the mother's mouth will be easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Answer: But if it is stuck below the belly and the pit, then you must remove it with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut the belly and the pit until that water has run out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Answer: But if the other members are stuck and the head turns back, then insert the left hand; but if the mother's mouth is blocked, then insert the hand into her throat, surround the head with it, pull that with those parts towards the mother's mouth, and especially insert a hook or two hooks and pull it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	Answer: And if the mother's mouth is obstructed by an ulcerous swelling that occurs at childbirth, then do not be troubled about it; rather you must administer evacuation of thick humid causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Answer: And apply poultices to her; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	Answer: And if the child is lying on its side, then if possible turn it around; and administer to it what we have said for a living child.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	Answer: And if that is not possible, then cut through the tissues and remove it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Answer: And you must not leave any cause behind in the secondine [afterbirth].
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Answer: And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the cure of the ulcerous swellings that occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	Answer: And if there is a flow of blood, then apply lint soaked in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	"I have seen a woman whose belly was already dead, yet she became pregnant again afterwards."
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	"It happened that a long time after an ulceration appeared on his belly; it swelled up from what had been opened and began to emit pus."
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	"I was called to treat him and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal."
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	"Then I carefully examined the causes of this strong attraction and extracted from him a bone, but after some days passed, another bone was extracted from him; this greatly amazed me because there are no bones in the belly."
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	"And then I realized that they were bones of the dead fetus."
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	"So I cleaned the wound and extracted from it many bones, for the woman was in her best condition, and she lived this way for a long time without any trouble."
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	"And I did not think it was strange, because in this there is science and help for the physician who uses his hands for healing."
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	"On the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus."
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	"The form of a vise with which the uterus is opened:"
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	"This is the form of the strengthener in which the threads are tied up, for tying the knots there should be two vises on both ends of the two threads."
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	"But this vise must be more subtle than a strengthener and made either of ivory or bone or boxwood wood."
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	"And each stick should be two fingers wide and the edge of each about one finger; the length of each is one and a half palms. And in the middle of the two sticks there are two adjustments of that same stick which are already fixed, of which the length is more than one and a half palms and the width of each is about two fingers or a little bit more."
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it is opened with them when you turn the two aforementioned vises."
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	"Another form similar to this, but more subtle and lighter:"
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"It should be made of ivory or boxwood sticks according to the shape of forceps."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	"But however at the end of it there are two adjustments like vises, and the length of each adjustment is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers."
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	"And when you want to open the uterus with these, then make the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her legs."
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"And properly open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps, according to how much you want of the opening of the uterus entrance, until it reaches what you want."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	"The form of a vise that they said in ancient times:"
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	"The form of an impeller with which the fetus is pushed:"
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	"The form of an amoebid with which the large head is crushed"
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	"And it is similar to forceps at whose end are teeth like vises. And sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form with teeth like the teeth of a saw with which it cuts and crushes."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	"The form of a small amoebid:"
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"The form of an awl having one spine:"
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"The form of an awl having two spines:"
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"The form of forceps with which its teeth are like a comb and the head of the fetus is crushed"
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"The form of spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"The form of two flat spatulas:"
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"Therefore all these instruments are practiced, and when more species of them and more prepared ones are multiplied, then it is lighter in its operation and better for men because of their quantity."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And do not use these instruments without good reason, because the necessity of them is not excusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"Of extracting the secondine."
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second stage of childbirth is delayed, you should command the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with some conditions, and stretch your hand over her mouth and nose. If the child exits through this method, that's good.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	"If not, then take an egg and pierce its shell with a hot poker, place it on those herbs that have been burned together with the mouth of the mother, thus like calamint, rue, and fennel, camomile, Arabic sickle, lignum cassia, and Saint John's wort."
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	"All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water inside the egg, and then place it on the fire."
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"And also place a reed tube made of cane into the mother's mouth, and hold it there so that the steam coming from the egg reaches the concave part of her womb."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"And then make her sneeze like we have said, and the second woman should quickly step aside."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"But if this remedy does not work and the woman is still not delivered, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of marshmallow root, and then carefully insert it into the womb and search with it for the second woman. When she has found it, then slowly pull out that hand little by little. But if the woman is stuck in the pelvis, then carefully insert the midwife's second hand as previously recommended, and when she has found the second woman, extract her gently according to the correct direction so that the mother does not suffer from violent attraction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"It is necessary that she be turned on her right and left sides with ease."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And also the amount of traction should be adjusted, because it will obey and avoid adhering too much."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"And if the mother's mouth is obstructed, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and medication with olive oil with herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if the baby is not delivered even after all the causes we have recommended are used, then be careful not to tire yourself out with repeated attempts at traction. But it is necessary that whatever comes out of the mother's womb be placed in a container for the woman, and then cauterize it with fire and tetrafarmacon; because this will cause it to shrink and become dissolved and will be expelled."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it is extracted, it causes a bad smell in the head and stomach, which causes illness. And then it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate remedies for that."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the Ancients already used fumigation with Nazareth and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"Method of using an instrument to fumigate a woman for retention of menstruation and the second woman:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	"It should be made of ivory or brass."
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	"And its thin extremity should be placed in the womb and its wide extremity over the fire, and fumigation should be performed on the embers of the fire."
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"And have that vessel ready to replace it when this fumigation is consumed and repeat another one."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	"Remedy for the cure of the unperforated anus of a newborn child:"
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	"Some children are born and their anuses are not perforated, which are very thin and closed."
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	"Then it is necessary for the midwife to perforate that opening with her finger; and if not, then perforate it with a sharp probe, but be careful not to touch the rectum."
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	"And also put over that wool soaked in wine and oil; and also cure it with ointment inside which has been boiled."
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	"But if you fear that it is closed, then place a catheter in the anus for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	"And sometimes occlusion of the anus occurs due to a hard mass or abscess. Then it is necessary that this hardness be incised and also cured with what we have said about treatment and lead."
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	"Treatment of fistulas that are formed there:"
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	"The fistulas that are formed in the lower part of the buttocks are usually large and thick, which are formed near the anus outside or in the space between one buttock."
E es una fistula o motas.	"And it is one fistula or many."
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	"And with this thickness being old and running with moist, thick white humors or thin pus, and sometimes there are penetrating passages in these fistulas."
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	"And these passages are known by what comes out of them through discharge and through windiness; and sometimes the disease is from discharge, and it often comes out of those worms."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	"And sometimes there are penetrating passages from these fistulas into the bladder and into the meatus of the penis; and some of those passages are into the junction of the vulva and into the notch of the scrotum."
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	"And what is known as a penetrating fistula that enters the anus and is not penetrating is this: you put your finger inside the anus, and then insert a thin probe made of brass or iron into the fistula where there is no turning."
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	"But if there is a turn in that place, then insert into it a thin probe made of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair on your finger."
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	"And if you do not feel it at all and there is no cause of discharge or worms or windiness coming from the anus, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then proceed to treatment."
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	"And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meatus of the penis, then its meaning is the emission of urine from there and prohibition of it until that place has healed in medicine."
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	"But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vulva or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that the probe enters there if there is no turning inside the bone, and there is pain in the area of the joint; and that pus always comes out from there; and that medicine and ointment are ineffective, nor does it heal."
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	"And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is labor and futility of the foolish physicians on which we are firm."
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	"But in that one which is not penetrating and not ancient, cure with iron can be hoped for according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have already said and proved."
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	"And it is that the disease runs between your buttocks and above your two thighs, raising their folds inside them; the vulva being inclined towards its belly; and then insert a probe of lead or brass if there is turning in the fistula, until you know where the probe passes."
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	"And if that disease feels around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger inside the anus."
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you feel the probe already entering penetratingly with your finger inserted inside the anus, other than what you feel between your finger and that opening or flesh, then know certainly that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on it, because there is no cure for it, as we have said."
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	"But however some say that it is cured in some men."
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	"And about the treatment by which help is hoped for in this, it is that you ignite a cautery probe according to the width of the fistula, as it is precedented, and insert that burning probe into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat it twice or thrice until you know that all those flesh tissues that are fitted together like chicken feather quills are already burnt."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	"And then cure it with hot compresses wrapped in linen until all those burnt flesh tissues are softened; and then cure it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh; and if it is healed, good; but if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment."
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	"And if the probe enters but does not penetrate within your finger which is inside the anus, and between that finger and the probe which is covered with skin or flesh tissue, and the fistula seems to be closed at its surface; then cut the skin of the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it cut with the probe, and it should enter into the fistula until the cut reaches the place where the end of the probe arrives, and by the probe it is freed and healed."
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	"Then cleanse those fleshy fistulas which resemble a bird feather quill, leaving none unaddressed."
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	"If blood often flows between you and your operation when incising those flesh parts, then it is better to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, for cautery with fire has two good habits: it adjusts the flesh and dries up the blood and excess humidity."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	"And also cure those wounds wrapped in a border or treacherously hidden where the arm meets the body, and also sometimes cure hard gangrenous flesh that generates and solidifies plague."
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	"And such medicines are styptic and drying; when the wound is restored, it is healed and fears no recurrence."
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	"But if the fistula has already entered into the anus and is elongated from its surface, then insert your thumb into the anus and search with it."
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	"And then if you find the bowel and there is a veil of skin or flesh between it and you, it is appropriate to attempt penetration, but this is not an operation performed through an incision, but rather through trust and hope."
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	"And this is accomplished in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or cut it so that the concavity of the bowel can be achieved such that you are able to insert some dressings and promote healing; do not proceed with an incision so that you do not wound the lacertum containing the anus, which would accidentally cause injury to the intestines without consent. And also cure it with water as we have said because it will heal quickly; or elongates that veil and clean out that pus by cutting into the bowel properly from behind, as we have said, either with a tent or another sharp instrument, and then cure those fistulated flesh parts which are in the section through cauterization. And also strive to perform the entire operation with an incision, if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the junction of the anus, it will be easier for healing."
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	"And thus the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the tent into the fistula and it is on the side of the anus around its surface with the cord and at the margin of the anus, then take a tent with a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing hearts in this form:"
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"And insert the tent into that file wrapped with fine threads or around those [threads]; and then insert the tent with the file into the fistula until it achieves its concavity."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if it is penetrating at the margin of the anus from behind, then you remove the thread from that track so that you can insert your finger into the anus; and remove the extremity of the thread and tie the two ends together with a knot, and leave it for one day or two. And when you notice that the thread is becoming embedded in the flesh, cut it there where those flesh parts are incised which are between the two ends of the thread."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And also cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever manner you are prepared, but take care that it does not penetrate too far into the front, so that you do not wound the anal sphincter muscle. And then cure it until it is healed."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The shape of the spatula with spines used to probe the fistula is thus: its curvature is very sharp while the other end is not sharp, so that you do not wound what is not necessary, as sometimes happens."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows through the incision of those [hemorrhoids]."
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: for some are between the buttocks resembling coal, while others are fatty like the fat of bacon."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	"And among those some are small and large; and blood flows from them constantly, they are many in number, and they are outside the anus, at its extremities."
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	"But those hemorrhoids that are outside the anus are due to little moisture, from which flows citrine water or a small amount of blood continuously, and they are classified according to the color of the body."
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	"And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and express until the anus prolapses and the hemorrhoids appear to you."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	"Then you grasp with forceps or with your fingers those that have prolapsed and cut them at their roots."
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	"But if the forceps do not hold those [hemorrhoids] due to their humidity and softness, then grasp them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a wool wisp, and remove them with your fingers. And cut them at their roots and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on that incision so that they are cauterized instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization."
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And then cure those with another treatment until they are healed."
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	"And if the anus does not obey to evacuation, then use a clyster on the patient with a small mouthpiece that has been washed with water from the anus and which facilitates evacuation when the patient strains."
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight. And you grasp them with your nail or with forceps and cut them. And then cure them with what has been said until they are healed."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"And if you have made an incision, it is necessary that you administer a suture of those [hemorrhoids] as follows: take thread wrapped and insert it into the needle. And remove the hemorrhoids at their roots above, and make the needle penetrate into the root of the other part. And wrap both extremities of the thread in the party below the needle laterally. And tie the hemorrhoid with a tight knot, and then cut the thread and remove the needle."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"And do this to all of them, leaving one intact without tying it, so that the superfluous blood flows from that [hemorrhoid]."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	"And then apply over the anus a cloth dipped in rose oil or wax, and have the patient remain lying on their back and command them to retain it."
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then leave that one until it protrudes. And when it has prolapsed, cure it with an ointment or with another treatment until it is healed."
De curacio de fistulas.	"Regarding the treatment of fistulas."
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	"Frequently this occurs due to dryness of the womb or constriction of nature."
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	"And if these are very old and cannot be cured by that medicine, then you must remove those with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they are moistened and scrape off the yellowish pus on top which prevents them from solidifying; and carefully cleanse them so that they may become solid."
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"Then take away those with great violence until the first blood comes out and they are scraped; and carefully cleanse them so that they may be healed."
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	"It is key to the treatment of leprosy."
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"Know that leprosy is a key disease and it is not if not redondos according to the color of the body like a head of a nail, and it happens throughout the body but more especially in the parts below the elbows and knees, where pain often occurs."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	"And then it is necessary that this is incised where the key is located, and removed with forceps or tweezers, and eradicated from its root; and carefully cleanse it."
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	"If you want to, cauterize the second one that comes next in its chapter."
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	"But a verruca is a small rough fistulous elevation on the surface of the body and many are often seen in children."
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	"And its treatment is that you stretch it out and incise it, or scrape it with a file or razor within so that it falls off."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	"And if you want to, cauterize it as we have said with fire or with an acute medicine."
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	"And now that both pimples and non-pimples are eradicated using the instrument that I will describe to you."
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	"But a formica is a small felted or fistulous elevation on the surface of the body, occurring frequently in the forehead, and when it is scratched it feels like the bite of an ant, and it becomes red around the body."
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	"And its treatment is that you take a quill of an owl or eagle feather, and it should be hard, and place it on the ant so that it contains it within the circle of the quill; and carefully turn your hand with the quill so that you incise what is around the ant, and press it onto the skin of the forehead, and eradicate the ant from its root."
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	"And if you want to, do this with a needle made of brass or iron according to this method:"
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	"Let the point of the needle be subtle, blunt (so that it is not perforated), wrapped with a thread so that when you press on it, its revolution becomes easy."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	"And if you want to, cauterize the ant according to what is mentioned earlier in the chapter of cautery under the heading of cauterizing a carbuncle."
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	"Regarding the shapes of instruments that are used for giving cautery."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	"Some cautery irons are made of silver or brass or molten lead or hammered ones, and some are made in small and large sizes according to those that they are used for, because the one used for treating young children should be small; and those whose handles are twisted or rounded, their cautery irons should be small."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	"The shape of a large cautery iron with few points:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	"The head of the needle at its tip where the bag is tied should be wide in this manner, and it should have such distinction that when the bag is tied, it remains like this."
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"And the lower extremity of it, which is inserted into the buttocks, should be blunt (so that it is not open) rather than pointed to subtlety; and on one side there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the holes should correspond to the thickness of the rays or hairs, one large and one small."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And let the bag in which medicines made from bladder of a beast or wool of sheep are placed have a root that is one hand's breadth."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And let it be pierced with many holes as it revolves, and if the space between the holes is equal to the thickness of the finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And then insert into those holes a strong thread of raw flax which is made from ten threads, or wind it around them; and adjust the bag with that; and when you have placed the bag on it, let it be tight at the head of the cautery iron between two distinctions with firm constriction, and then cauterize each hole: But the quality of cauterizing in this manner is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the illness; and take care that it is not too cold nor too hot."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And then let the patient lie on his back, elevate his hips up and place under him either a sheet or a blanket. And then anoint the extremity of the cautery iron with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert it into the buttocks gently; and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it twice hard so that everything inside the cautery is evacuated from the bowel; and then remove the cautery iron, and let the patient lower his hips to the bed."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if the medicine forces him to excrementation, let him retain it as much as possible; and if he sleeps with that throughout one night, it is better for healing."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you cauterize him in cases of diarrhea and loose bowels and excrementation comes out from there, then repeat the cautery until he is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if in the buttocks there are hemorrhoids or painful fistulas, then let the cautery iron be very subtle and pointed, those with which children are cauterized."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"Regarding the treatment of plagues."
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"I have already stated in the division of the treatment of plagues that which was appropriate for this book, and I now state the treatment of those with medicine according to their completeness."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"I say that plagues are differentiated according to what they are made from, and according to the place where the plague occurs."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes why many times plagues are made are such as: wounding by a stone, or incision with scissors or knife, or percussion with lance, or club, or arrow, or something similar to those of many causes."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But the plagues that are in the places of the body are such as: plague which falls on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or thigh, and similar to those of the limbs."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"And I am recounting the treatment of some plagues because this reasoning and rule apply to other plagues as well."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"And I will begin with simple head plagues, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"So I say that when a simple head plague occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from wounding by a stone or something similar, and the chain has already broken only on this side and the plague is large, and you fear that an abscess will form there, then immediately perform cephalic phlebotomy and do not delay; and extract blood from him according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibiting phlebotomy exists, especially if the blood that comes out from the plague is little."
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part, and keep the patient from getting drunk and from wine and from heavy foods."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"But if you prohibit some cause because of its minuteness, then let the food be diminished and do not approach meat or wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"Place your hand on the wound; if it happens to be cauterized, apply olive oil usually heated or wine in which it has been steeped."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"If you are sure that the wound is cauterized, then place your hand on it; if it is fresh apply the patient's blood and the air has not changed what was put on the powder which I will recommend to you in a moment."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"And if the air has already changed it, then place your hand over the wound until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	"But if the wound is large or caused by an incision and its lips are not properly adjusted, then adjust those with stitches according to what I will recommend about the stitching of them."
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	"But if the wound is already exposed to the bone and does not involve retention of it but only a small suspension, then cut that and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of sinew. Command the patient to be fed on foods which are coarse: heads of cabbage and turnips and things like them until they are convalescent."
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	"And if you find putrefaction in the sinew and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that is rotten and cast it out, and cure it."
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows and it is not severed by medicines, then inquire about the artery. And if you find that it is not cut, then cut it with a scalpel or ligate it. And if necessity requires that what has been said does not help, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped."
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	"And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is light. Therefore you should powder those with this powder, so that it may consolidate them before the air changes them."
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	"And the manner of making the powder is this: Take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, unburnt sulfur three parts. Let all be well ground and sifted, and let the wound be filled with it, and let it be pressed on by good pressure until it adheres to it, and let it be coagulated with the blood."
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	"And properly press that upon it with powders and leave it alone. Do not remove it while it is like this until it is completely adherent, for the medicine will not abandon it until it is healed."
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"And sometimes one does only cauterization when oil of sesame and dragon's blood are not at hand."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	"And this is the same operation performed on large wounds when it is necessary to press upon them and bind them tightly, especially fresh wounds with their blood still flowing, which the air has not yet altered."
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then it is not suitable to use this powder. But at such times treat those wounds with what has been said, thus: you should apply upon them some of these ointments digested, or you should apply upon them flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they are freed from putrefaction; and properly cure them with the other treatment until they are healed."
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	"But if a fracture of the bone occurs in the wound and it is small, then treat it with this."
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	"And I direct you to the treatment of fractures of the head in that which follows."
De las plaguas del col.	"Of wounds on the neck."
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	"But if a wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in treatment between that and a simple wound of the head."
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	"But if the nerve of the neck is cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no other remedy but to avoid carelessly treating it with something that causes violent astringency, such as vitriol and similar things which burn nerves and cause contraction."
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	"And do not apply any hot cause upon the wound, for the substance of nerves is hot and their continuity is with the brain, which is the first part of all members."
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	"And if it is treated with mild medicines such as washing the wound with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and aloe when washed with sweet water and other soft minerals according to this manner, and humid ointments."
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	"But if the wound is large, then perform suturing or bind its lips together and properly treat it with powders until it is healed."
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	"But if the wound has depth or occurs in the lower part of the belly with putrefaction, then perforate it in the least depressed place."
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	"But if an artery has been cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate it or bind it off, ligature it, or cauterize it if necessary."
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the spinal cord has been injured or completely severed and the veins of the neck are preserved, then approximate the lips of the wound over the spinal canal with sutures without touching it; afterward extend it evenly and reduce it to its natural shape. Then properly stretch it with decent bandages and leave it alone for a few days. And properly treat it with ointments that have astringency and excitation until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	"But if the wound has reached the bone and penetrated it deeply, then curette it, and afterward remove all fragments of bone that you can. And what you cannot remove, leave it alone until the wound putrefies and separates itself, and its inflammation is alleviated."
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	"And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with that powder which I have recommended to you."
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	"But if there is a deep fistula in the wound, then treat it with that of which the memory will come later in its proper chapter."
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	"Of wounds on the neck or similar ones that are deep between the shoulders and are made with a cleaver or knife or lance or similar things."
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	"If it is a wound from a lance or knife and its depth is uncertain, then consider whether there is wind in the wound when the sick person exhales. If so, know that the wound is mortal."
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	"And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then apply to it in the first hour that powder which I have recommended to you. And do not compress it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returned to the heart, which would aggravate the illness, but rather apply an attractive ointment twice a day."
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	"And if the ointment is not available, then apply a cotton wick moistened with honey around the wound so that it may suck up its moisture. And make sure that the sick person sleeps on the side of the wound so that what is fitted in it runs."
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	"But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there has been no spasm or trembling of the heart nor constriction of the lungs and other good dispositions of the sick person occur, then know that the wound is saved. And then treat it with dressings and the other treatment until it is healed."
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	"But if its healing is delayed and much time has passed, then know that a fistula has formed. Therefore treat it according to the chapter concerning fistulas."
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	"And if the wound is from a cleaver or knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with what has been preceded about suture if it is large, or with powder if it is small."
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	"But if there has already been injury to the bone and pieces of it have already grown into the wound, then turn the wound over and try to remove those pieces if they are detached."
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If they are not separated, then leave them inside until the plague can improve, for their extraction is alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental plagues in other members, the remedy in treatment is the remedy that we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indigestion which occurs in the belly is either great, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Regarding the great pain sometimes felt in the belly or nerves of the belly, it is necessary for them to be introduced and their suture to be made more vigorous and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And small disruption is done more difficulty by another manner, and therefore the reduction of it is more difficult if you do not promptly introduce them to their proper place, for they are open and enlarged so that the introduction of them is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, for in that one it is not difficult to reduce the belly, as it is in the two species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that there are four ways of suturing the belly, but two of them are common and suitable for sutures of other plagues of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two others are proper to other plagues, but especially proper in suturing the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I will recount to you each one with exposition and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the plague is small and some cause of the belly is exited by it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either by the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the belly has become inflated by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when it is thus, then you should scalp that in such a way that you submerge a sponge or wet cloth in water alone or squeeze in hot water cumin, parsley, and broth with that the inflation may be resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes you will find it useful to use wine in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you should moisten the belly with water in which is cooked mallow and mallows, for by this it is alleviated from within with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the intrusion of the belly has been removed by this remedy, then you should cut through the disruption a little with an instrument with which you can excise the hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first remedy is better when it is suitable that it not be cut and there is no need to cut unnecessarily or rashly.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	About the instrument, see its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	The one part of it is cut sharp and the other not-sharp, and the extremity is subtle, but not as subtle as a spatula, rather let it be somewhat obtuse.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the plague is enlarged and goes out from the belly, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form in its own proper place, if this is possible about this, for this is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the sick person lie on their back and raise their buttocks as high as their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise the head of the bed and place the feet higher than the shoulders.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always keep your intention and consideration on this so that the part in which the plague is may be higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you should administer this in large plagues and medium-sized ones.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, keep this that is prepared by you and especially make sure that the person administering it is among your closest friends, who should hold the disruption entirely with their hand and adjust the lips of it, and especially uncover from here to there so that no stitching occurs unnecessarily.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the common manner of suturing: you take a needle or count of needles according to the quantity of the breadth of the plague; and then lay aside from the extremity of the disruption the finger of the ring finger, and stretch the needle once, but do not put thread in both extremities of the cord with two extremities of the ciphac that is left behind the cords of the fingers inside, until you make it penetrate this part; and you have now added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, and so you have made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then stretch with doubled thread around the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and then join both lips and the plague by a decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that, and then join this with thread thus like feast with the first needle; and do not cease doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed all the contraction of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be medium in thickness and subtlety, for thin needles easily cut the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to put into the cord, therefore they should be medium in thickness and subtlety.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary that the needle be put in both extremities of the cord very much, lest the flesh be easily cut and the plague open before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And do not prolong the suturing so that the plague is not prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not disturb the sick person during their sleep; and you will sprinkle powder on the suturing from every part, which holds the extremities of the needles; and leave them until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And these kinds of suturing with needles in what manner are more convenient for small plagues, for there is enough in the suturing of them with one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second kind of suturing is common: it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the ciphac, in one go, with a needle on which there is thread wrapped around it subtly and thickly.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread draws back and goes from the lower part of the plague to the higher one, so that the suturing is according to the sewing of cloth with which the cloths are stretched.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suturing the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this kind of suturing is known by men.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with such suturing I healed the plague that had been cut in a man's belly, which had been struck with a dagger, and the disruption of the plague was more than a palm wide, and it had issued from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the bowel had been forced by the plague for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and he was cured and is healthy; and thus he lived for many years, and is converted in his dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle it was done, for I did not cure him with ointment, because there was a place where ointment was not found nor any medicine, but only paused over the plague twice a day and washed it diligently with water of honey until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"I say there are two kinds of stitches that are proper according to the narrative of the Word."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"And you begin with the closure of the cord, and insert the needle from outside to inside."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	"And then with the needle penetrate into the cord and in that manner insert the thread lengthwise along the entire body, leaving the end of the thread out which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside to outside on the other end of the mesh."
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	"And then when you have made that penetrate, now make it penetrate again in the same manner on the other end of the mesh from outside to inside; and leave the end of the thread which is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from inside to outside."
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	"And make it penetrate with that penetration in which you make it penetrate into the thread on the end of the mesh which is on the inside where all that penetrated."
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	"And again begin from this side and take that with the end which is of the thread on the other side, and remove the needle from the cord which penetrated, and again reduce that into that cord and tie the end of the thread which is on the other side with this end of the mesh; and remove that from the cord which is on its part."
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	"And do this once and again, and do it once more afterwards inside where you will close everything that is outside according to that example."
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	"And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you close with a skin suture in such a way that you sew the thread once from the end of the cord and leave it again inside so that it is completed."
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	"But the second type of suture which is particularly recommended by Gulia, and this concerns the inside and its recommendation, is that you sew it according to semilunar fashion in such a way that some surgeons sew it like that, thus joining together each part with its corresponding part conveniently by nature; and they apply the end of one side and the end of the mesh on the other end of that; and this is done as I recommend."
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	"You should keep the needle at the end of the mesh close to the outside part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that sun, and leave two ends of the thread; and again turn the needle around and make it penetrate from outside to inside on the two ends of the thread."
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	"And again turn those loops around and make each loop penetrate from the inside part into the outside part on two ends of the mesh which are on the opposite side."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	"And this manner of suturing is better than the common light suture, and it is a suture of which there was previous mention."
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	"This is the discourse of Gulia"
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	"And some say that abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so you should insert into these loops a file and begin with needle insertion from that which you should do and make it penetrate inside to the other side according to the suture of those who sew the heart through the opening."
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	"And know that when there is rupture in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen."
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	"But judgment about the treatment of pleurisy is also judgment about other kinds of pleurisy."
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	"The cause of this is that when you succeed in treating recent pleurisy with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the chest and sew it up and dress it properly, then there will be no relapse on that occasion."
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And if the air has already altered the pleurisy, then some people in your presence will make hard dressings and apply the files, and they should be consolidated with thread and mesh; and then treat it like the treatment of other kinds of pleurisy until it is healed."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	"But if you are not present with these medicines, then wait for it for a while because it begins to cough up blood soon, and changes its color twice a day like I have shown you, until it is healed; because in many cases when pleurisy is simple, you do not need other treatment."
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	"But if you fear that pleurisy may communicate to the main limbs, then it is necessary that you submerge lion's wool in oil of good quality or rose oil and apply it around the parts which are between the shoulders and leave them on for several days."
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its chest because this happens many times, then treat it with black stiptic wine and more so if the putrefaction has reached the chest and an opening has been made penetrating into the cavity of it."
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	"And know that pleurisy which is in the thick chest is easier to heal than that which is in the subtle chests."
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	"And it is difficult to heal because the chest which is called 'gegunu' does not receive any healing of pleurisy that falls into it from anywhere; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and its large size, and its subtle body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves."
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	"But if what proceeds from pleurisy is tissue and you succeed in treating it recently, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you reduce the chests equally."
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	"But if it has passed to that extent and has become green or black, then you should strengthen it with a file on the spot that is darkened by it so that blood flow may come, because there are veins and arteries in the tissue."
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	"And then incise that which is other than that thread and leave two ends of the file hanging from the part outside of the pleurisy so that you may be relieved of its attraction; because you should remove the covering of the tissue and the emission of blood from pleurisy."
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	"Memorandum about pleurisy when it occurs in the chest."
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	"When there is rupture in the chest and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people because I saw a man who had been affected with pleurisy in his belly with percussion of lance and the pleurisy was on the right side of the stomach, and the pleurisy was old and had made fistula, and he was freed from it and became well."
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	"Therefore I followed the treatment of him although he was not certain about its healing, but I succeeded in subtly treating it until it was healed and the part was consolidated."
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	"And I also saw that the part was consolidated, but he suffered from illness which happened to him in his belly; and no one knew about this bad accident and he remained in his usual dispositions eating and drinking, and then entered into a bath and exercised himself in his sayings."
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	"And some experienced people have said that when pleurisy occurs in the chest and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner: and this is that you take figs with large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the pleurisy and place one of those figs which has its mouth open on the two lips of the pleurisy; therefore when it takes hold of them and strangles its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and is not dissolved."
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	"And then place another fig near the first one, and do not cease this until you have used figs according to the quantity of all the pleurisy."
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	"And then reduce that and close up the pleurisy; and those heads will remain attached in the chest until the chest is healed, and there will be no harm to anyone."
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	"It is now possible to tie the intestine with a subtle thread made from the cleaned intestine of an animal, then take the end of this thread and tie it around the end of the intestine, wrapping it and carefully inserting the tied end back into its place."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	"This method of suturing with ants is merely a matter of trust and hope."
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	"But if the wound is large or extensive, especially in one of the delicate intestines, for it only causes further subtlety and not true healing of the whole."
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	"Of the treatment of furuncles and fistulas."
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	"Do you know that any ulcer or abscess which opens and becomes chronic without being consolidated and drained always, wherever it may be in the body, is called a fistula, and we call this type of boil an 'azukem'?"
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	"And in truth, a fistula is a hard, thick, white node without pain and with a concavity like the concavity of a chicken's egg; for this reason it is called a 'rizat' ulcer, that is to say, an egg."
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	"And in some people it is moist, which oozes out; but if the moisture is quickly drained off, it heals in a few days."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	"Sometimes this moisture is abundant, thick, and subtle."
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	"And I have already mentioned earlier in the section on wounds that any ulcer which does not heal or is not in bare flesh occurs due to one of nine causes: either from a lack of blood in the body, or from the malice of the ulcer itself; or because there is hard flesh between it and its lips preventing the growth of new flesh; or because it is too large; or because the ulcer itself is putrid and the material that enters it is of poor quality; or because the treatment used is inappropriate; or when corruption occurs in the region, causing pestilence; or due to the nature of the region itself, such as Endovel, where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs and delayed healing of boils takes place by nature; or because there is a bone or many bones in it."
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	"I have already shown all those causes, their signs and their treatments with medicines in the division [on ulcers]."
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	"And so I should tell you about the treatment of fistulas which is done by operation using ointments."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	"And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for there are those which pertain to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the bladder, or to the intestine, or to some of the ribs, or to certain vertebrae of the back, or to certain joints composed by such composition as that of the hand and foot; and those are which give proximity to the principal member and similar ones."
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	"And so those fistulas which are according to this manner are of the diseases that are difficult to cure, and they do not receive care, and occupation with them is work and ignorance."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	"And if there is some fistula the depth of which does not reach these places that I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its cure, and you want to reach cognition of it, then take a tent of iron or bronze, and if the fistula goes straight, search for it with this."
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	"But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a tent of subtle lead, for lead due to the weight of its body is alleviated and curved towards tortuosity."
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"And if the fistula has no horrible openings, it is not possible for you to indicate anything about it with a tent."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	"Therefore, search for the opening through its openings, because the humidity with which you cleanse it will go towards the other openings and the flow from them."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	"And furthermore, inquire carefully in what manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bones or nerves, and whether the fistulous cavity is distant or close, or whether it is a fistula with many openings that is above all of this with your full strength, with your examination, with which you examine the disease, and the discovery of pain through your compression with the hand on the place, and similar signs and accidental causes of apostemes."
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	"And when you have considered all of those causes with true knowledge, then go to the cure according to confidence: and that is whether you consider it now whether the fistula is apparent nearby in a healthy place, distant from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places which I have mentioned to you."
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Now you dry out the fistula according to what was said beforehand about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born from the opening of the flesh, or of bile and similar things, and cure that wound when it has been healed."
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	"But if the fistula is of great depth and it is rectilinear, then you must insert it into the front as much as possible according to your ability, and then cleanse it from all its corrupt flesh; and also administer hot cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula which you have taken hold of with iron."
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	"And do this several times within until the sharp medicine has burned away all that is rough in the cavity of the fistula due to corruption."
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	"Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it has healed."
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it's not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have advised.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire as we have advised and dry it according to our instructions, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then scrape away that flesh until all corruption is removed. Then care for it with this medicine so that it may heal inside.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and spits blood like this, then know that you have not yet reached the complete eradication of the corruption; therefore open up again carefully and search out the reason for it and cleanse it with your last strongest medicine, and then restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, that is good. But if not, then know that the corruption is in the distant depth of the body which has not been reached, and therefore there is nothing to do but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is corrupted and small, or if you can pull it out, then pull it out with gentle forceps which are suitable for that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	But if many bones are exposed, then carefully remove all of them and do not leave any cause without your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any difficulty with the causes of moisture, and there is no fear or error in their incision, then incise those membranes or flesh which are here, and relieve the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that time, then pause over the wound and make a dressing for it so that it may close up. Leave this in place until it is around those bones of flesh and membranes, and guard the dressing so that it does not become consolidated, and that the section which you have incised during your operation remains open.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Therefore, if you fear [that the wound will become closed], apply a poultice soaked in olive oil or Egyptian anguent or one of the green ointments, for when those membranes have dried up and the bones are separated by ablation, then attraction is alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the hipbone or thighbone or similar to those, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape away that corruption with a rasp only until it has been completely removed. Then restore the dressing immediately.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if much of the bone is corrupted and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound immediately. Incise it completely down to where the corruption has reached, and cure it so that it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend this to you: what should happen to a man in his thigh so that you would pause and seek help during your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man aged about 30 years suddenly felt pain in his thigh. There was swelling internally on the inner side of the thighbone up to where the abscess had reached the thighbone. It was an abscess with a large head and no external cause could be found.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so much time passed with that [abscess] due to the error of doctors until it finally burst. Much matter flowed out, and its cure was then suspended until the hip was fistulized. Many orifices were made in the hard bone through which there was constant discharge of pus and moisture from the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	Then for many months various doctors attempted to treat him over a period of two years, but they knew nothing about the art until I was called upon.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And when I saw his hip and the matter that flowed from those orifices in great abundance, his whole body was already weakened and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then I inserted a tent into one of those orifices until it reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then you searched and examined all the orifices and found that they all originated from every part of the hip.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	Then I took courage and incised over one of those orifices until I discovered a portion of the bone. I scraped away that corrupted part, which was earthy and corrupted and blackened. And a portion of the hip had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Then you closed up what was revealed and prepared for surgery on the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I thought that it was not the bone but only the corruption that should be cut out and closed up, as I had already determined.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then you suspended dressing with a consolidating medication for many days, yet it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then you reopened and discovered again over the bone according to the first discovery, and you found continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I closed up what seemed to me to be beyond that corruption. Then you proceeded with the cure and dressing, yet it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	Then you discovered it again and did not cease cutting the bone little by little particularly until you cut around about a palm's width of it. You extracted it with its marrow, and then you restored it with medications, and it became consolidated lightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	No further operation or section is necessary in this case except for the disposition of the weakness of his flesh and for the scarcity of his endurance and fear of death. For he was always depressed due to the superfluity of evacuation and bad syncope.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, he was healed completely, and there is nothing lacking in the place of bone or hard flesh. His disposition in his body was good and he returned to his former strength; he changed his habits and did not do anything contrary to his health nor suffer harm from any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in place of flesh that is thin, then it is necessary for you to section it in this manner: Take linen and strengthen it at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it out. Then pause that first linen with a thicker one made of wool. And then lay it over the flesh that is near the bone, and extend its end so that you can pull the flesh away from those parts. And uncover the flesh over the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not scrape the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place wood or a table below the bone appropriately, for when you do this, it prevents the saw from scraping the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	It is necessary that the sawing be done little by little over the corrupted place, because if the corruption is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface, it will be necessary to saw again afterwards.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	But if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, with one part continuous with another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then uncover the flesh from all parts. And place wood below, and cut off that first part where the corruption is so that the sawing may continue into the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	Let the sawing be according to the location of the corruption, a little at a time, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	But if the corruption is at the joint, cut off that corrupted joint and saw off the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	But if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no reason to saw off except for harm.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult. But you must inquire about the corruption and how it appears to you, and scrape away that corrupted part according to each disposition that is possible for you. And with each incision, be sure to correct what you have done so that you do not harm any vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"You should know what kind of chisels and saws are suitable for cutting these bones, considering the location of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, you must prepare appropriate instruments for each type of operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	"Knowing that this operation requires the use of a specific tool, when you have great learning and long experience in the techniques of this art, and knowledge of various illnesses, then you will already know what is appropriate for each tool regarding all illnesses."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	"And you, having learned at the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use with ease to perform your prohibition which you will practice on others."
Forma de serra:	Here is the English translation for "Forma de serra":
Forma de autra serra:	"Another way of cutting:"
Forma de autra serra:	Forma d'autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Other method for a large incision
Forma de ray:	Method of the ray
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this drill should be shaped like a star-pointed key, and its points should be shaped like the tips of a star.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is advisable that at the same time they are rubbed with the heads of joints when they are corrupted, or if the mouth is too wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form for larger razor than others
Forma de razori menor:	Form for a smaller razor
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a broad-bladed razor
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	A well-made curved knife with the sharpness of steel and the blade shaped like a dagger
Forma de lu:	"Form for it:"
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Razor shape with concavity
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Another subtle razor shape
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with curved tip
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form for small razor resembling a stingray's tail
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incision tool used to cut bones
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incision tool
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this one resembles a drill, with its tip resembling a saw, and is used in many places for cutting through bone:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a drill suitable for use in drilling holes through bones
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its tip is triangular and pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	It is made of Indian steel, and similarly covers all the causes that we have mentioned for razors, incisors, and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of bone-cutting tips and bone saws
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Extremities may become paralyzed either intrinsically or extrinsically. If you have treated that paralysis with medications and the cure does not help, sometimes the paralysis will spread to a limb for no apparent cause. In such cases, it is necessary to incise that limb at the location where the corruption is present, so that the illness can escape through that opening and thus avoid death or harm which would result in greater damage to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	The sign that this has happened is that the limb turns black where it was burned by fire, or that it becomes very dark where the paralysis has entered into that limb and spread throughout the entire body. Therefore, incision of that area is indicated in such cases.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the cause of the paralysis is due to poisoning from causes like that of the sea scorpion or viper or spider and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the paralysis or poisoning is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	Similarly, if it reaches the hand, then you should incise that area at the wrist, so that the corruption does not spread into the arm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if it goes up from there, then incise the arm at the elbow joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	"And if corruption and dampness spread beyond the cold, then death of the patient ensues; but to administer another cause for this in cure is a matter of quantity of power."
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	"And similarly if corruption invades the said lung, then you shall insert a finger into one of its nostrils."
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	"And if you take hold of the lung, then you shall remove it entirely."
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	"But if it cannot enter the nostril, then you shall insert your finger into the space at the junction of the nostril."
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	"And if corruption has already spread over the nostril, then there is nothing else to do except dismiss it and let the patient die."
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	"The method of inserting or cutting the member is that you should stretch one thread at the part where you wish to insert it, and stretch another thread over the place. Then extend one thread above and below, and stretch another thread in its middle; then separate the flesh which is between the two threads with a sharp knife until the whole flesh is exposed, and then it shall be inserted or cut."
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	"It should also be stopped with linen at all parts so that it does not touch the place where it was; and that healing may come to the patient with an appropriate scar and a cauterized wound."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	"But if bleeding occurs while performing the operation, then you shall cauterize the place carefully, or apply some powders to stop the bleeding. And then return to your treatment until it is completed."
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then bind the member with a bandage at its proper place, and care for it until it is healed."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	"And I tell you what happened to a man in his foot. He had this accident which we are talking about, which is the fourth kind that happens in the foot due to burning that was like the combustion of fire."
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	"And that corruption happened first in his toe, so that it spread throughout the entire foot."
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	"And then that man prepared to remove the member because he could no longer bear the pain and burning. He inserted his foot at its joint and it was healed with fire."
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	"For a long time, this same corruption happened in the finger of the hand indicated."
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	"And then it came to me and caused that excess fluid to be reflected back onto the hand where I had placed my medicines for its cleansing, so that the excess fluid was not discharged and began to spread to another finger until it reached the hand."
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	"And he asked me to cut his hand off, but I did not want to do that hoping for the reflection of that excess fluid. And more than that, I feared that if I were to cut off his hand it would be mortal, because the power of the disease was strong."
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	"And after he left me, he returned to his own land and later I heard that that man had cut off his entire hand, but then it was healed."
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	"And I have not yet finished this story except to serve as an aid for those who suffer from this disease, and so that it may be significant for which it is significant and according to which it should be treated."
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	"On the treatment of sinusitis and the quality of cleansing enema with medicines."
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	"When an aposteme occurs on some fleshy members and the space of the aposteme is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out, leaving the place empty like a vessel, and the cord that is above it appears thin like a wisp of silk, and there is no further corruption nor does it impress on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called 'sinus' but not 'fistula.'"
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	"But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not sinus."
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	"And the treatment is to cut off that cord entirely as it is rolled up, especially if it is thin and appears like silk cloth, ensuring that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption."
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	"But if you hope that the cord will adhere and that corruption has not yet progressed further, and there is swelling at its mouth, then you should treat it with an enema."
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	"And if you examine the sinus, then if it is large and the arm that emerges has a foul odor, then you should cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine made of oil, vinegar, and cinnamon bark ground up equally and adjusted in a vessel, which should be cooked over fire until the medicine reaches the consistency of honey."
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	"And then you should take some of it and dissolve it with water and honey, and use that to cleanse the sinus, tightening its opening, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours."
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	"And then remove it with a sponge; do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the infection is removed."
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	"And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes when this medicine is not available to you. Then take the ashes of grapes and put them on the water, then mix it together and cleanse it with that until you are satisfied that the sinus is now healed."
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	"And if the disease does not tolerate this Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then you should cleanse it with water and honey mixed together in equal parts and also mix some wine with honey, because the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when the wine has excess tannin and dryness."
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	"And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus has been removed, then cleanse it with something that causes flesh to grow in it."
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	"And if you take some diaphoretic ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or cleanse it with other medicines and ointments that have the properties that I have already written about in the treatise on ointments."
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	"And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the nozzle of the enema, then you should dilate it little by little with a small iron rod, pausing in between to soak it in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is dilated."
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	"And similarly if the opening is wide, then you should bring together its lips with a suture and leave some of it open for the insertion of the enema without any addition."
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	"And if the opening of that from which the arm emerges is located above its parts, then dry it with pus below where it is in order to cause the arm to flow downwards, because when the arm is blocked by the pressure of the sinus, flesh may be generated within it."
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environment of pus below as you wish, then prepare the member with such preparation that the arm flows out of it lightly according to what seems appropriate to you and without any cause for the arm being retained."
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"And take consolidating medicines that should be placed on the sinus appropriately according to what you wish, then extend them over cloth of linen."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"And the linen should be of such quantity that it covers all of the sinus; and then, near to the right side of the opening of the sinus, make an incision with forceps a little larger than the opening of the sinus, then extend over another piece of linen some ointments according to the size of the incision, pausing them on this for a distant position from the opening of the sinus so that it may alleviate the exit of the arm and not cause any pressure, and only change the linen once or twice."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"He who is above the opening of the sinus, he removes at all times so that it does not escape from its place in the arm."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And how do you know whether what comes out of the arm is too much or too little, or if it's digested, or not digested?"
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"Also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	"And when your treatment is prolonged in such a manner, and you see that the matter thrown out of the sinus opening already adheres, or approaches adhesion, then on the third day, carefully remove it. And when you remove it, immediately change the cloth for another one and renew the dressing."
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	"But if a considerable amount of space remains in the sinus after its opening, do not despair about the adhesion of it, because healing will occur. For some people, there is delayed generation of flesh in wounds, and among these are those in whom the opposite occurs."
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if after many days the arm remains undigested from the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere. And if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged healing, then adjust in the drying of medications. And if medications are humid in their substance and virtue, they become dry like a fine ointment, when there is an adjusted superfluity of addition of rose water."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	"And the final thing to be done when it is cured is that you take some fine ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on a linen cloth soaked in its own substance. And apply that cloth warmly on it, and use it thus."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	"And if it seems that there is no ointment available at the time of action, then take honey and thicken it with heat, and use it. Or else, take myrrh and aloe wood and incense, grind all together finely powdered over the honey when it is on the fire, and apply this mixture on a cloth and place it on the sinus. And apply that honey which has been cooked until it thickens, and powder it on a cloth and place it."
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	"And sometimes it is administered with long and fine roots of celestial lily (which is celandine) and powdered barley and centaurea, and use these simples alone or adjust them together ground and sifted finely powdered over the honey which has been prepared. And use it."
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	"And if the sinus remains prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in the bone of it. And make an examination in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments. Then treat it with fistular cure, as mentioned above."
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	"On the treatment of panaritium, ongnis attrita and incision of added finger and section."
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	"An ingrown toenail is an accumulation of flesh that occurs next to the nail of the big toe of the foot or hand, and it grows quickly in other toes as well. When its treatment is delayed, it becomes more serious; either it's a chronic ingrown toenail, cauterized and corrupted, emitting a foul odor, or the entire toe may become corrupted."
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	"And so, when you have finished what we've said in this section and your treatment does not conform, then it is necessary that you cut away with iron all the excess flesh that remains from the nail and properly cauterize the wound afterwards, for cautery is very helpful in this matter."
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, yet if there are excrescences on the nail that begin to press upon the flesh inside, causing it to throb and ache, then you should make a subtle incision at the angle of the nail that presses against the flesh, lift up that part and cut away the flesh easily, and apply over what remains of the flesh cooling medicines until all is removed; and properly dress that with ointment until it heals."
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	"But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should cut into the bone and remove it, for there is no time when the bone will heal if it is corrupted."
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if the corrosion and corruption extend to the finger, then you should cut into it at one of its joints according to what is remembered about its condition, and properly dress that until it heals."
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	"But if the nail receives injury or pressure and there is intense pain in that place, then first perform bloodletting at the beginning of the illness, and properly scrape the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, making sure that the section does not reach into the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause great pain to occur and it will produce an excess growth of flesh in that location; and properly dress that place with something that relieves pain."
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	"But this nail, which is found in most men, is usually entirely fleshy and also has bone, or it may be very hard at the tip of the nail."
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	"And some are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some of the joints of these fingers."
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	"But that which is born in some joints of the finger does not hurt, and that which is born at the joints is usually painful."
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	"And those that are born fleshy have a broader section, and it should be cut off at its root with a broad spatula."
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	"But that which is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; therefore beware of cutting it off."
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is born in the middle of a finger joint, you should first cut into the flesh of it with a round incision down to the bone, and then saw through it with one of those suitable saws, and properly dress that until it heals."
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	"But consolidation which occurs among these between their veins or by the nature of the person born so, or by consolidation due to plague or burning from fire, or by appearance, then that consolidation should be cut into until it returns to its natural form."
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	"And also place between their dressings of softened linen soaked in rose oil to prevent them from becoming consolidated lightly, and separate those that are consolidated with a thin sheet of lead so that they may be consolidated according to what is necessary."
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	"And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of these on the palm, then you should cut that consolidation according to what is prepared and convenient for the shape of the member."
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	"Of incisions for removing warts, there are three kinds."
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	"Varicose veins are twisted, thick veins full of melancholic superfluities that appear in the mouth of body members, and they occur more often in the legs, especially among travelers, workers, and porters."
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	"Then you should administer a purge for the body of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and also bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	"But the cure for them with iron is done in two ways: one way is that it should be incised and drawn out that black blood, and the other way is that the vein should be raised and all of it extracted."
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	"The section is done in this way: first, immerse the beginning of the vein with cold water so that the thick blood may be resolved, which is the sediment of the vein, and next, strongly tie the vein of the sick at its upper part near the thigh bone into a bandage, and next dry the vein at one place, or two, or three with a wide section, and then raise the black blood with the tweezers from below the part where it exits, upwards downwards until as much blood as desired and as many times as necessary has exited, which is the amount that can be tolerated by the patient."
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	"And also, he should tie it up, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	"And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is necessary for the patient."
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	"But the raising of it is done in this way: you who raises the vein of the sick, if he has much pain and fever, and next puts him in bed and immerses his vein with cold water until it reddens and the veins are dilated; or that he be exercised by strong exercise, if bathing is not available to you, until the limb is heated."
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	"And then dry the vein on the right side of it with a section in its length or at its end where it joins the bone, or at the top part of it near the heel."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	"And then open the vein with forceps and strip the vein from all sides until it appears at sensation, and one should look for its appearance as often as desired declining towards blackness."
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	"And then remove the bandage and the vein becomes white and strong like a chord."
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	"And then you place there what has been elevated until it rises above the bandage and remains raised, and suspend that with one or two cloths."
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	"And then dry another section near that section for three days and then strip the bandage from above the vein until it appears."
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	"And then elevate that and cut into it again with another section near the heel, and then remove that and elevate it until it exits through the second section, and then remove that from above that."
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	"And do this until you have removed it from the section that is above or below all sections until everything has exited; and then cut into it again."
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	"And if you cannot remove and elevate it, then insert a thick needle with strong thread and tie it up and remove it; or put there what has risen above the bandage and twist your hand around it until it is completely wound."
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	"And make sure that it is not cut; for if it breaks, it will be difficult to raise that much and harm will come upon the patient through that."
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And when everything has been removed, then place over the site of the wound lanolin immersed in vinegar and rough oil and unrefined oil until it is healed."
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	"And if the vein is contracted without tortuosity where there can be wrapping around the divisions and not according to what has been said, then you should make incisions over all parts of that tortuosity and at its wrapping places, and then suspend it with forceps until everything rises."
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	"And make sure that your incision does not cut the vein and does not wound it, for it will be difficult to raise it if you do so; use your caution in this."
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	**Form of the incident with which the vein is cut:**
Forma de unci orp:	"Prepare a ram's horn:"
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	Not like needles it is not sharp nor has it an acute extremity so that it does not harm the vein; and it is of thick flexibility lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein through its subtlety; having in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of leg vein extraction
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the calves of the legs, such as at Atig in Arab territory and in dry and hard terrains of little tenderness where there is neither grass nor water.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other places on the body apart from the calves.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its gestation is of putrefaction which comes from leaving the spine like venom inside the body, serpents and worms, crabs and worms generating between the spine and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the onset of its occurrence is that this vein becomes inflamed in the calf with a sudden inflammation; and nearby there is an ulceration; and from there begins the vein to come out from that ulceration which appears like the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when the extremity appears, immediately you must wrap around it one weight of lead whose weight is that of one dragon, between two dragons, and hold it there and let the lead hang suspended from the calf.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as some cause causes it to come out from its places outside, wrap that in lead and hold it there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it is not prolonged, then you should cut off a part of it and wrap up the remaining; but do not cut it so deep that it remains inside, for if you cut it too deeply it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an aposteme and putrefaction in the place with a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For that reason it should be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the end of it and none remains inside the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein has been found in some men to be as long as two palms and ten fingers, and I have even heard that one was twenty palms long.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut at the time of its treatment, then insert a straw into the track of it and pierce it with a long straw through the body until all that is in the matter has been evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and also treat it with the cure for apostemes.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes out from there with many openings, and each opening has its own branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore treat it as we have said in the division above, and with what is said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of cutting for worms generated under the skin, called bovine ailment.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This ailment is called in some lands "bovine ailment" because many times it occurs in oxen, and there is born between the skin and the flesh a worm which goes throughout the body, pushing and pulling, and is felt from member to member until it tears apart the skin and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation occurs because of putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its harmfulness, for when it goes in the body and rises up to the head, and reaches the brain, then it causes a great disturbance there and enters and destroys the brain, which happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you wish to cure it and extract it, then do not do so unless you see its movement and appearance by feeling it, and then you should press down on what is above it and on both sides of it with pressure and constriction, and then dry up around it and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and cannot be caught hold of, then you should apply a cautery with fire to the place where it resides until it is burnt up, for the greatest danger is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if it reaches the head near the brain, then press strongly on the brow with firm constriction and also dry up around it and extract it; and let the patient use medicines to purge his body of bad corrupt humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of cutting for the ailment called nafir
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This ailment is called in our land "nafir," and it is a pain that comes in some members, and also changes from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you will see this one as I will describe to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to see a woman patient in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the elbow, and as it had been there for about an hour, I saw that inflammation move like a worm pushing itself along, but more slowly than if it were actually moving, just as if it were molten silver running from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain went away from that place and became apparent in the muscle, and stayed there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	"Next, correct the other body between where it reaches the other arm."
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	"I also told him to turn himself around so that I could see his whole body; and he was amazed at the transformation of his limbs and their speed."
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	"And I had seen such things before in my travels according to that manner, but I had never heard of anyone suffering pain from being transformed limb by limb."
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	"But I did not see this among the women as I saw it in men."
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	"And you do not think that is because the woman was old, with dry skin and visible veins, and in this appearance there seemed to be that windiness transformed."
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	"And it is necessary that this backward curvature does not appear in those who are graceful and have moist skin with veins concealed."
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	"And when you want to perform the operation, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent on the surface as we have said. Then press down upon him and release him gently and carefully until that constrained windiness is released, and cauterize the spot."
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	"But if you do not see it among your patients, then treat him with exercise of the body and with what expels windiness, and apply to him pills made from fetid herbs and pills made from serpentaria and similar things."
De extraccio de sagetas.	"On the extraction of arrows."
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to species and the parts of the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that those with large points, small ones, concave tips, or blunt heads are solid; while those with three edges, tongues, or star-shaped tips have different properties.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those that strike according to limbs and parts of the body are of two kinds: For limbs or principal members cause death, such as the head, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and their like; therefore when they strike in one of these members and you observe signs of death which I will mention later, at that time it is necessary to avoid removing that arrow from those places where death ensues most easily, and when no such bad signs appear and the arrow is not hidden deep within the member, then remove it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	"Servants are distinguished by when an arrow strikes them and passes through the bone, exiting from the cyphac which is on the brain. This occurs due to violent soda and scotomia, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting bile, speech is suddenly cut off, voice destroyed, and white humid plague-like matter exits from the place, similar to water."
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	"If these symptoms appear before you, then you should abstain from treatment and extraction of the arrow if it is not outside."
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	"When the arrow strikes near the left breast and seems to be stuck in hard flesh, not soft flesh, you will feel a sudden movement like a pulse or flow of black blood. There will also be coldness in the extremities, chills, sweating, fainting, and soon after death without delay."
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	"And when the arrow has pierced the lung, there is an emission of frothy blood from the wound. The vessels near the neck swell up, the patient's complexion changes, they expire loudly or sigh for breath frequently, and desire cool air."
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	"And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm, which is located in the lower chest area, there will be pain near the lower ribs. There will also be sudden, violent coughing with pain and sighs, but not all members or muscles will be affected."
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	"And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be violent vomiting of undigested food."
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	"And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes lodged within it, then there will be some hole or tear in the skin, flesh, or intestines (which may have ruptured). There is little hope for recovery through extraction of the arrow."
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	"And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is excreted externally, with some blood or other matter from the wound outside. There will be severe pain over the area of injury, indicating that death is imminent."
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	"However, the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, spine, collarbone, hip, thigh and their counterparts are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not hit any vein or artery, nor is it venomous."
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	"And I will tell you what I have seen of these arrows, so that you may know about their treatment."
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	"The cause is that in a man who was struck by an arrow in the lacrimal gland of his eye near the root of his nose, when I extracted it from the other side of his ear, he recovered without any injury to his eye."
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	"And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the eyelid of his eye, leaving the eyelid puffed up afterwards. The arrow was already hidden and could not be seen except for a small part that adhered to its shaft. It was one of the sharp arrows of the Turks with a lion's head made of iron without feathers."
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	"And the Jew recovered, and there was no great harm done to his eye."
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the throat. It was an Arab arrow with feathers on it, and I cut through it between two guides and then carefully extracted it. The Christian man recovered."
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	"And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck in his belly and thought that he would die from it. But thirty days had passed without any change in his condition due to the arrow's location. Therefore, I cut into the area around the arrow and pulled it out carefully, and the man recovered with no great harm done."
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had become lodged in his back. The wound around it had healed over seven years later, and then the arrow suddenly emerged at the root of his thigh."
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	"And I saw a woman who was struck by an arrow in her belly. The wound healed over inside her without any change in her condition, and the woman suffered no injury to any of her natural functions."
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	"And I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face. The wound healed over and the arrow head broke off without causing much pain, and he appeared similar to these others."
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	"And I extracted the arrow from the face of one of the king's nobles that was lodged in his nasal septum and had deviated slightly towards the right side. The entire arrow was hidden."
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	"And I was called for his treatment three days after he was struck by the arrow."
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	"And then I opened the wound of the arrowhead very narrowly. Then I probed it with a subtle finger but did not feel anything; however, he felt pricking on the outside of his right ear. Therefore, I believed that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow."
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	"And I widened the opening with an ointment having attractive and digestive properties, believing that this location would swell up so that the arrowhead's location might appear to me, so that it could be seen."
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	"And no significant harm occurred at that location where the arrowhead had reached. I continued applying the ointment for many days without any harm occurring, and the wound healed during this time. After several months had passed, one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and remembered it to me."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	"And then I applied a burning caustic medicine over the wound for many days until it opened up. Then with my finger I probed that area and extracted the tip of the arrow subtly, which adhered to its shaft."
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	"And precisely by that burning medicine I opened the wound until I saw the tip of the arrow visibly. And I spent time on this matter for four months."
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	"And after the wound was enlarged and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, I did so but could not grasp anything with them. Then I did not cease probing and manipulating that area in various ways until one day I began extracting it using methods of extraction described at the end of this chapter, specifically using forceps adapted for descending fractures. And after that wound was restored."
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	"And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed completely, and the patient recovered entirely with no harm remaining in him due to any cause."
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	"And I tell you about the methods of extracting some arrows because it would be too long to discuss those that I have not mentioned here, for the divisions of this art and its definitions are not understood by narration alone, nor can they comprehend them in this book."
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	"And the learned artisan compares little about much, and about what is present rather than what is absent. And he discovers new operations and new instruments whenever strange causes occur in this art."
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	"And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the limbs into which they have been inserted except by two methods: either by attraction of the area in which it is lodged, or by the opposite direction of its path."
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	"And that which is ejected through the entrance point, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy area, is pushed out and ejected."
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	"And if the arrow does not come out at the time it is cut, then you should leave it alone for a few days until the flesh around it softens and its attraction and exit are alleviated."
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	"Similarly, if the matter has entered into bone and does not yield to your efforts, then leave it alone for some days and treat it again with attraction and motion each day, and it will be discharged."
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	"If it does not yield to your efforts after several days, then you must perforate around the arrow in that bone entirely with a thin awl where the space made by the arrow is widened, and extract it out."
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	"If the arrow has entered the bone of the head and has already pierced one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of those accidents that I mentioned earlier appear in the illness, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it there until the patient's state is equalized for several days; because if the arrow pierces the brain, death will not be prolonged."
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	"If the arrow has only entered the flesh of the bone and does not pass into the brain, and the illness remains for several days without any of those accidents occurring, then you should endeavor to attract the arrow and to attract it out."
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is deeply embedded and does not yield to your extraction efforts, then you should administer thin awls around the arrow as we have recommended, and cure the wound internally until it heals."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	"But if the arrow has already disappeared in the place of the wound and is hidden from sight, then you should explore there and try, and if you feel it, then attract it out with some suitable instruments for attracting it."
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	"And if you cannot get it out because of the thickness of the flesh and the length of the bone, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then make an incision in the flesh until it is widened enough that it will be possible to extract the arrow."
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	"And if the ears are those which are held, then cut away completely the flesh in which it is embedded with all the effort you can muster; and endeavor on this, if you cannot avoid cutting through the fracture of the ears and twisting them until you succeed."
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	"And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then use a twist of your hand and forceps at all points until it succeeds; and be very subtle so that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for you to attract it and extract it."
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	"And if you cannot succeed in that at your first attempt, then leave it for a few days until the swellings around it have subsided, and then again treat it when it is eased."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	"But if you encounter flow of blood, then administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter."
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	"And guard your skill in incising vein or nerve or artery, and endeavor in every possible way to avoid the arrow; and do this with facility and tranquility and slowness and steadiness as we have taught you and recommended."
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	"And thus do you contract the arrow in such a way that the wound is made according to the figure according to which the lodging of the arrow was in it, for this is more advantageous."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	"But arrows which are fired from the opposite direction, or those which have already caused some wounds in their exterior parts, or which appear to be near the surface of the wound due to the swelling above it and its prominence; then cut over that; and let the section be according to the quantity taken by the forceps; and then pull it out, for it is easy to extract."
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your hand according to its direction until the arrow presses on the bone, and widen it with it further, and then extract it."
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	"And otherwise, leave it for a few days, and then again treat it as we have said."
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	"And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then push it out with it."
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	"But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer propulsion, then introduce this, if it is blunt, strike concavely so that it enters between the concavity of it in the head of the arrow and then push it out with it."
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	"But if the arrow is concave, then push it out with a strong instrument entering into it, for the arrow will be eased by that."
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	"And if the arrow is embedded in bone, then it is necessary for you to cut away all the flesh around it, if this is possible for you, and then treat it with what is appropriate."
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if the arrow strikes bone, or enters the belly, bladder, or side, and is so close that you can touch it with your hand, and if it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut over it and guard yourself from incising vein or nerve, and extract it; and sew up the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed."
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	"Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:"
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The tips of their tongues are sharp as bird beaks, fashioned like saws when they grasp at the arrow to not let it escape.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And there are many different kinds of beaks, large, small and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrowhead and its width, the breadth of the wound and the tightness of the flesh.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape this concave extremity like a bird's feather to relieve the insertion of the arrowhead into the wound, and pressure from that wound.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape the pressing of the concave extremity
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	like this way, so that it may alleviate the insertion into the concave arrowhead and is pressed with it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Venous phlebotomy
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins used for phlebotomy are: 30, of which 16 are in the head. There are two pulsating veins near the ears called "auriculars," two herbs on both temples, two veins in the lacrimal ducts of both eyes called "aspectantes," one vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and another at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins above the upper lip; two veins inside the lower lip; two veins behind the tongue called "algeletic"; and two veins on either side of the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	"And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is that which leaves the curvature of the wild boar's tooth; the second is saphenous, and its location is near the leg of the domestic dog; and the sciatic vein, and its location is near the leg of the wild boar; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those."
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	"The benefit of treating veins near the ears is for old-fashioned headaches and migraines, and for healing wounds and ulcers on the head from ancient times."
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	"And the method of letting blood from these veins is as follows: it should be done on a clear day, and the patient's head should be shaved in the occiput area where both veins are located, using a wide cloth with good friction; then strongly bind the patient's head with a bandage that appears at both locations near the ears in two points pressed down on the head; then seek that vein with your finger, and if you feel its pulse with your finger, here signal to stop."
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	"Then take the lancet knife, which is that which is inserted, and carefully insert it into the vein in the elbow until the bleeding comes to the bone."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	"And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards, and incise the vein with an indirect incision."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	"The length of the incision should be equal to two fingers placed side by side or nearby; let blood flow out as much as desired."
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And sprinkle powder on it and leave that until healed."
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	"And as already mentioned at the beginning of this book, an incision is made there and they are cauterized."
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	"More about the two great veins that are in the temples: the benefit of phlebotomy is for ancient migraine, persistent headache, and frequent eye inflammation, as well as acute excess blood flowing to the heart."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is, as I recommend to you: compress the illness with your hand until the two veins appear clearly through touch and sensation; then, feel their pulse with your fingertips, and at that moment strike [with the lancet]."
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"And likewise, elevate the vein above it with your index finger, insert the phlebotomy lancet diagonally from below, elevate the vein upwards, and incise it thus as you have done on the other two veins; let blood flow out according to your need."
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then release the compression of the illness, place your finger over the vein for an hour to stop the bleeding, and apply pressure on that spot with cotton and powder, pressing it down firmly. Leave it until healed."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	"And this has already been preceded by the memory of them [the two great veins], their incision, and attraction at the beginning of this book."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	"And therefore, the benefit of phlebotomy from the vein on the forehead is also the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient facial illnesses, migraine, and eye disorders with infected ulcers."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is, as I recommend to you: that the illness compress his head with a cloth until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called 'fossor' [excavator], which has this form:"
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Press the prominent point on the top of the 'fossor' onto that vein and puncture it with a quick or slow motion, according to his condition. Let the blood flow out according to the amount you desire; then release the compression of the illness and press down firmly until healed."
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	"Sometimes it is performed with a broad phlebotomy lancet; however, it need not be acute-pointed like the other phlebotomies. Approach it from the side and incise it across the transverse vein, as bone is nearby and would break easily if the lancet were too thin."
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	"But the benefit of the two veins that are located on the eyelids is for treating scabies of the eyelids due to inflammation and sebaceous matter in the eyelids, as well as facial illnesses."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy is that the patient compress their head with a cloth, and then you incise those veins while standing at his head."
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	"And the phlebotomy should be made across and slightly along the length with a blunt-pointed lancet, as there is little flesh in that location. If the lancet is too thin, its tip may break easily."
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then let the blood flow out as much as you need, and press down on those spots, keeping them compressed for one night. Then release them."
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	"But the phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent colds, as well as facial illnesses, migraine, and inflammation that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient compresses their head and you take hold of their nose with your left hand, then take a long, thin lancet and insert it into the middle of the tip of the nose in a straight line, as the vein does not appear here by touch. As soon as blood begins to flow..."
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	"...gradually withdraw your hand along with the lancet and let blood flow according to your need. Then compress that area for one night, as it is easily restored."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both cheeks is for constriction of the throat and the onset of leprosy, as well as many other illnesses such as eczema and malignant ulcers that are corroded, like herpes zoster."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those veins is that the patient compresses each side of their head with a cloth; then stand over the patient's head while they are seated on a chair."
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	"And then incise the long vein with a broad, blunt-pointed lancet gradually. Then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or as much as is needed at that time. And do the same on the other vein."
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	"And then release the cloth and compress both veins with a medium force to prevent the patient from fainting. Then let them rest overnight, as the wound will be healed by morning."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy on the veins in the angle of the jaw is for treating small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, gingivitis, malignant ulcers and cracks, as well as malignant ulcers that occur in the nose and around it."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those veins is that you have the patient sit facing you and compress their head with a cloth. Then roll back the lips and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left side. The demonstration of each is by its darkness, as there are many small black veins around them. Then incise each vein obliquely."
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	"But if you are in doubt about which one is the correct vein to incise, then aim for the incision that shows more blood and pus."
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And perform phlebotomy on the two veins located above the lips as well."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"It is more common to incise both veins that are on the lower lip."
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both veins that are below the tongue is for preventing suffocation due to inflammation of the throat, as well as inflammation of the uvula and other mouth illnesses."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those veins is that you have the patient kneel between your thighs facing the sun, elevate their tongue with a mouth gag, and look below the tongue to see one vein on its left side and another vein on its right side. The color of each vein tends towards darkness."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then perform phlebotomy on each vein; but be careful not to withdraw your hand while doing so, as there are arteries below them."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the veins that are commonly phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are present in all humans. Phlebotomy on these veins is performed in two ways: either by puncturing with a mulberry-shaped or olive-shaped lancet of varying sharpness, or by cutting with a scalpel-like lancet called 'alnessil', and this is how it is done:"
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"And this alnessil is designed for cutting, and its edges are sharp and thin according to the width of the veins and their degree of tension."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"Method of phlebotomy with a mulberry-shaped lancet:"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"It is used like this: its edge should be aimed at opening concave veins that appear full and contain thick, turbulent blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	"And this is the method of phlebotomy with an olive-shaped lancet:"
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"This phlebotomy uses a lancet of lesser width and very sharp point, suitable for drawing blood from fine veins containing subtle, citrine-colored blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"Of the remedies for phlebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: for it draws out the blood from illnesses that are below the throat and the stomach, and thus relieves the chest and abdomen."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And let the phlebotomist be careful when performing phlebotomy on this vein, for there is an artery nearby, and if he errs in puncturing the phlebotomy site, he may injure that artery and cause profuse bleeding. Therefore, it is necessary not to puncture it with a sharp point but rather to cut it with scissors."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilica vein cannot be seen manifestly, then you should leave it alone and move on to another vein or seek some branching one; but if you puncture where the end of the arm finishes, for that is visible; and cut that with scissors as we have said."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	"But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the median vein, then first at the bend of the arm where you know the pulse point, and hold it in place with your thumb; then lift up the arm and cut through the skin with concave scissors with a sharp point as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery nearby."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	"And when you press with strength on that limb and observe swelling in the place where you have pressed with your thumb, know then that it is a swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	"And if blood flows during phlebotomy like a child's urine, and it is thin and red, know then that it is arterial blood. And therefore, you should cover your finger with that place for some time; then remove your finger gently, and if the bleeding stops, which often happens, then press on the arm and leave it alone."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	"And guard the wound of the cut with a cloth, and keep it clean and avoid touching it for some days until it is healed."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	"But if the blood does not stop flowing, and it seems that you do not have present the appropriate medicine for this, then cut into the artery itself if it is apparent to you. For its extremity will contract and the bleeding will cease. Or take a wisp of lint and press it onto the wound; then take some plaster and apply it; then take one handful of pulverized frankincense and tie it tightly over the place where the vein was cut with linen and cloth for another day."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	"And therefore if the blood stops flowing, that is good. And if not, then treat it with whatever has been previously mentioned about stopping the flow of blood."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	"And the cessation of bleeding can be difficult in many cases due to the small size of the vein and the possibility of obstruction by the limb of the arm."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"But phlebotomy on the basilic vein is beneficial for removing blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalica, as we have said."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	"And therefore, one should be careful during phlebotomy of that vein, because below it is a nerve; and if the nerve becomes attached to the puncture of the phlebotomy, then numbness will occur, and healing will be difficult, and perhaps not complete. And this nerve can often be felt; but in some people it may be hidden and subtle and not apparent. Therefore, you should pause your phlebotomy with which you are performing phlebotomy on that vein, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut across the length of the vein."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	"The benefit of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the eyes."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	"And therefore, if you want to perform phlebotomy without damaging the artery or nerve, choose the olive vein or the myrtle vein for phlebotomy."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	"But nevertheless, you should ensure that when performing phlebotomy, you do not puncture the head of the lizard alone, but rather seek out the lightest spot, and do not touch it unless you have first struck it with percussion several times before performing phlebotomy."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	"But nonetheless, sometimes inflammation occurs in some people when phlebotomy is performed without percussion first; but this inflammation soon passes."
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	"But the quality of that phlebotomy and its accidents are many, concerning which you should consider their correction."
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	"The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy should only be administered for the preservation of health and with hope of benefit and caution against the occurrence of illnesses. And it should be performed on one of the veins that are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, basilic or median vein; and it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and around meals in winter, when signs of repletion appear."
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"And phlebotomy should be performed either on the third day or at least three hours after a meal."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	"But phlebotomy should be administered whenever it is beneficial and necessary, whether night or day, at any hour and at all times."
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	"And children should not be phlebotomized until they are at least fourteen years old, and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized except between the fourth and seventh month; and elderly people who have passed sixty years of age should not be phlebotomized."
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	"And before anyone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's claw purge, especially if there is much retained feces in them, so that the veins do not draw up the superfluities during phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and do not harm the principal members."
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	"And patients with sacred or profane insanity, nor those suffering from drunkenness or madness due to drinking until it passes, nor those with dropsy should not be phlebotomized. And phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, and near diseases of the abdomen, and near excessive sex and work and exercise during fasting or vigils, or any cause that dissipates virtue, either bodily or animal."
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	"And before phlebotomy, consider the subtlety of the humors, especially if the blood is thick; and use foods and drinks, and medicines if possible, to thin it out."
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	"And before phlebotomy, enter the bath if there is no prohibition against it, or exercise somewhat to make the blood more subtle."
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And pause phlebotomy around midday, that is around the hour of tierce, as we have said."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	"And you should make sure that the person undergoing phlebotomy avoids all harmful passions and actions on that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, excessive work, pain, sex, or their like."
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"And at his seat should be present those things used by men with fragrant aromas and odors, and balsams and like substances according to their availability."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	"And the phlebotomist should sit on a cushion that is higher than the patient's."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	"And first extract your arm and rub the patient's arm with your hand two or three times, and then tighten the tourniquet with a cloth strip and wrap it twice."
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	The stricture is softened, for the stricture, when not equal, or if there is excess fluid, then prohibit blood flow; or if it's due to softening, then also prohibit blood flow completely.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	Regarding the stricture, it's necessary that whoever is to perform phlebotomy should rub their hands together before veins are inflated and clearly palpable.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	The phlebotomist should anoint their lancet with a little bit of properly prepared olive oil. Then they should place the index finger of their left hand on that vein where the phlebotomy is desired, allowing the vein to swell slightly and preparing it for percussion, in order to determine which vein is suitable for phlebotomy, namely one that throbs like a heartbeat, not one that is full of windiness and contracts under pressure when the lancet is placed upon it. If the lancet opens the vein too widely, then it is too narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be experienced and attentive to all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	After placing the lancet, if the vein is not filled with blood at once, it's better to withdraw and wait awhile. If after that time it still doesn't fill with blood, then try another spot slightly below or above the original location, but avoid any area that appears inflamed or infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	If the area is inflamed or the patient feels faint, then it's best to leave them alone for a day or two and not attempt phlebotomy again until they have recovered, as bleeding can worsen an inflammation. Do not strain the limb too much nor attempt bathing after the procedure.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	If the blood flows freely, then continue with the phlebotomy.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening is small and blood flows subtly, fearing that not enough blood will be let, then insert the lancet again into the same track but adjust the angle slightly to increase the size of the opening. Do this carefully before the area becomes inflamed, as many men are susceptible to inflammation with even a small incision.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if the area is already inflamed, then do not insert the lancet again there, for it serves no purpose. Instead, place a piece of lint soaked in olive oil on that spot to alleviate the heat and help cool the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	It's better to use olive oil than other oils in this location.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, it's recommended to apply a lint soaked in olive oil during any phlebotomy where veins are not allowed to bleed freely, such as when using a tourniquet or tying off the vein with ligatures. This should be done after tying off one of those veins, as it helps to thin and disperse the blood, preventing clotting.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a large inflammation develops at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially if not enough blood was let or if the vein was barely opened, then apply cold compresses soaked in a solution of water and salt. Soak a sponge in this mixture, lightly wring it out, and place it on the area for about an hour to help reduce swelling and inflammation as it dissolves the heat.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It's important to do this especially when stopping the flow of blood from that vein with a ligature or cauterization, or when tying off another nearby vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If there remains some discoloration or greenness in the area for a few days, don't worry about it. If you wish to apply something to the spot, use a plaster made from aloe and myrrh dissolved together, or apply a compress of mint juice or chamomile juice mixed with a little olive oil.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Many times, inflamed areas and swellings occur after phlebotomy at the temple.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Then place your hand over that area and if it feels soft under your compression, then that swelling is harmful and bad. In this case, be sure to apply one of the remedies mentioned earlier to prevent excessive bleeding from an artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Make a plaster with something astringent, like oak bark or witch hazel, to harden the area and promote healing. Then treat it with other suitable remedies until it is fully healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It's important to remove blood from every person according to their constitution, the amount of blood they have, and the color prevailing over their blood, as appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red. Similarly, if the blood is thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner. If the blood is thin or sharp, allow it to flow until its acuteness is removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	If someone who is robust and has a strong constitution requires bloodletting on one occasion, then make the phlebotomy incision wider and longer to let more blood flow.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	Conversely, for those who are weak or frail, make the phlebotomy cut smaller and narrower, and bleed them in small amounts over several sessions. This is to avoid weakening them further by removing too much blood at once.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	It's better to make a transverse cut across the vein for phlebotomy rather than just puncturing it with a lancet.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of phlebotomy avoids excessive bleeding and nerve damage, making it more praiseworthy and safer than methods based on width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	For those who commonly faint during phlebotomy, it's recommended to treat them beforehand with a small piece of bread infused in vinegar or simple oxymel, lightly wrung out. Then bleed them in three or four sessions over time.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If the person has a cold constitution, then before phlebotomy, have them take bread infused in myrrh syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar fragrant ones.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If someone faints during phlebotomy due to losing too much blood, then they should drink beef tea and sweet-smelling syrup afterwards. Use aromatics such as aloe and linseed oil to anoint their feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	Use the other causes mentioned in the division of syncope due to evacuation that were discussed in the chapter on syncope.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	For those who want to expand their veins and dissolve their blood according to the second intent (purpose), it's recommended that phlebotomy be done on someone whose constitution allows for significant evacuation, but whose strength is weak. This way, the blood is removed gradually over several days, according to the amount of blood that can be safely removed based on their constitution.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	For those who wish to expand their veins and draw off their blood according to the second intent (purpose), and whose constitution is robust, then do so about eight or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	For those who wish to remove blood from their body in opposition to its natural flow (as in cases of left-to-right shunts), it's recommended that they do so on the second or third day after vein expansion.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	If there is a small amount of thick, sharp blood in the body that causes fever, it's necessary to remove a large quantity of blood in one session, and make the opening wide enough to induce syncope. However, be sure to maintain all conditions for safe phlebotomy, and place your hand over the pulse of the vein to prevent accidental death instead of fainting, as many untrained or negligent practitioners cause this very mistake.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	Do not attempt to redraw blood after the vein has been tied off and it's difficult for blood to flow out. Instead, press on the area with considerable force and curve your hand slightly outward, as this is much better.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	To avoid phlebotomy being performed a second time due to inadequate blood flow, you can:
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	If the vein is infected, then let it be and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If there is a need to draw blood for evacuation according to necessity, and it is not an excuse, then you should draw that blood from the patient's arm or another vein in their other arm.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called the "funis of the arm" is phlebotomized in place of the cephalic or basilic veins when they are not visible or obscured because it consists of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of phlebotomy on the patient is that they should insert their hand into warm water until the tourniquet tightens and the vein appears clearly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And it should be pressed firmly over that limb with a tight bandage; and phlebotomy should be performed transversely in a small area, not laterally or along the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	The opening should be wide and the phlebotomy incision should be made where you perform phlebotomy on the junction of the hand, a little bit.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in warm water again and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you may be excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and in wintertime, the body is naturally accustomed to having blood warmed by hot water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins because there are no pulsating veins or nerves in it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And phlebotomy of the little saphenous vein of the right hand is beneficial for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of phlebotomy of that vein is that you should press the hand with a bandage or your hand, after immersing it in warm water until the vein becomes inflated and clearly visible. Then perform phlebotomy transversely; if you mistakenly cut something else, it will not matter much.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And be careful not to compress your hand during phlebotomy because the nerves lie close beneath the skin and can easily be injured.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And again immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and prevent its flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And once the blood has been extracted according to necessity, then you should press over the vein with oil and salt so that it does not heal quickly. And do likewise for all veins that are streight.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of phlebotomy of the median vein of the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do likewise in phlebotomy of this one as you have done with the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of phlebotomy from the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower parts of the body, such as those of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the skin and ulcers of old wounds, and similar diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and rub it until the veins appear clearly. Then bind the junction of the foot with a bandage and locate the opening of the vein near the heel, where many branches of it are found on the surface of the foot.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And then perform phlebotomy on the largest branch or one close to the heel below the ankle joint because that is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that lie close beneath it. And stop your phlebotomy with the instrument you are using for cutting across, so that if you wish to incise deeper you may do so without harming any nerve.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the phlebotomy be sufficient.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"Yet if it is prohibited to let blood, then immerse the patient's foot in warm water until the blood flows freely from that area until it is evacuated."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the phlebotomist fails at first attempt, then try again with the flebotomy on another vein slightly lower down, because this location is suitable; and do not fear the patient's malice, but protect yourself from nerves as we have said."
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	"And similarly act upon the other foot equally."
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"And concerning the sciatic vein, its location is below the ankle joint near the starting point of the fibula."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy for him is pain relief when it is done to extract blood."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that the patient enters a warm bath, and swiftly and strongly presses his hand to his side above the ankle bone on top of the four aforementioned veins with a long narrow cloth, so that nothing else appears."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"And thus when it appears, then you phlebotomize that vein according to each vein as much as is possible for you and according to the cross-section, which is better; or else incise that vein with an incision or sever it with a section, because its location is suitable."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And it is in many men much enlarged; and if you happen upon that one, and none of the rest appear to sensation, then phlebotomize some branch of it, namely that which appears on the back of the foot towards the aforementioned heel and ankle."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"And protect yourself from nerves, and let flow as much blood as you wish."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"And immediately untie the ligature and pause upon the location of the phlebotomy wound, and strongly press the location because it is healed lightly."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"Regarding ventosities (flatulence) and their qualities of use."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Winds are of horns, or of ears, or of veins.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And bloodletting is done in two ways: one through scarification and extraction of blood, the other without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this bloodletting that is done without scarification has two methods to it, for either fire is used or none at all
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And of the fourteen locations on the body where bloodletting is performed with scarification and extraction of blood, one is at the nape of the neck which is the last section of the head; another in the middle of both parts of the collarbone; another under the chin near the jawbone below the mouth; another on both spatulas; another on Alhocoster which is above the hip joint; another on both foci which are located on the forearms; another on both kneecaps; and another on both thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And bloodletting does not draw out the blood from large veins but only from the small capillaries scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it does not lose its virtue through this method, just as there is no loss of fluid through phlebotomy. Nor should bloodletting be done with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess within the body until all of the body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if bloodletting is necessary for an illness or for cleansing, it should be administered at the beginning, middle, and end of the month, and at any time when necessary.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	This is why men are those in whom blood is multiplied within, requiring its extraction through bloodletting and appearing grave and sad-faced; and others are those who show signs of excess and heat in their face and head, and in their neck; and others are those who show signs of heaviness in their face and forehead, and darkness and dimness in their eyes; and others are those who vomit blood at the location of their bloodletting; and others are those whose laughter is multiplied; and others are those who have a taste of blood in their mouth, or who have an inflamed tongue and spit blood; and others are those whose sleep is multiplied, and others who see blood in their dreams, redness and spots, plagues, and other causes according to their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when it is necessary in any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or middle of the month, we command bloodletting to be done at that time because those days have passed two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And it is beneficial to perform bloodletting from the nape of the neck when it causes heaviness in the head and makes the eyes grow dim; but it is necessary that this be an appropriate evacuation for the entire body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this bloodletting is done at the location of phlebotomy from the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	But it is not proper to use this method in those who are of cold temperament or those who have catarrh, as it causes great harm to them.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore bloodletting should not be used for the elderly and those whose illnesses are hot in nature.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But it is said that continuous bloodletting causes forgetfulness. Therefore, you should command the phlebotomist to pause his hand slightly at the beginning of the bloodletting in order to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But bloodletting of the armpit is done at the location of phlebotomy from the dark vein and the basilica vein: and therefore it causes asthma, and constriction of the lung, and division of the chest muscle of the lung, and coughing, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And therefore bloodletting from the armpit should be done gradually, because if it is paused suddenly at the beginning, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And bloodletting from the elbow causes accidental pains in the head and inflammation of the eyes, migraines, and pleurisy, and pains in the roots of the teeth. It is done at the location of phlebotomy from the basilica vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you should command the phlebotomist not to press his hand during scarification so that he does not injure the artery and cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And bloodletting from the chin causes dryness in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and it resembles the appearance of illnesses that are in the mouth. It is done at the location of phlebotomy from the lymphatic vessels that are on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But bloodletting that is done over the two spathula bones causes headache, which occurs due to congestion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And bloodletting from the two divisions of the jawbone of the face causes benefit in phlebotomy of three veins: the basilica vein, dark vein, and cephalic vein. This is because that attracts blood from all those veins that are large in the flesh, and also attracts the small veins from the other veins that are larger towards reaching the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the phlebotomist not to proceed with scarification because the location is bare of flesh and thus exposed to nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is one bloodletting method in which bloodletting is done over the buttocks, causing hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are also there.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should command the phlebotomist to do a large bloodletting with a wide-mouthed cup because that location requires strong sectioning. And few thin-walled cups are drawn and it is scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But bloodletting from the calves decreases by degrees in order to manifest diminution, because it attracts blood from the entire body and causes old pains of the kidneys and womb, and of the bladder. It also provokes menstruation, and causes boils and swellings, and it is done at the location of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and the ankle bone, and two small veins.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they greatly weaken the entire body and cause syncope in many people.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And bloodletting from the ankle bone has benefit similar to that of bloodletting from both calves.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of bloodletting is that you should pause the cup at the beginning empty and follow by moderate suction, not prolonging the position of bloodletting but pausing it lightly and removing it gently so that the humors come to the location by equal coming.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease doing this until you see the location already reddened and swollen, and that the appearance of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you scarify and continue suction little by little, and carefully consider the condition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that person who has tender flesh with few pores should be scarified only once and not more than that, so that the location does not become ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the phlebotomist to widen the scarification a bit and then press gently while maintaining suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then you should scarify twice because in the first instance the way for subtle attraction of blood and wateriness of it is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired through scrutiny.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very fetid, then no scarification should be done on the third occasion so that it can conclude.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little at a time, one scarification is sufficient for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to extract much blood, we should scarify with great scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary for us to scarify with a previously opened scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification refers only to the depth of the vein.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	"When the chain (intestine or hernia) is thick, hard, dark, and its openings are narrow, it is necessary that the places for the cups be anointed with lenitive, aperitive, resolutive; if it is in summer time, thus as oil of aloe or violet oil, or dossy mallows oil, or cooked cumin oil; and if it is in winter time, then oil of narcissus, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood, for those resembling this."
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	"If the superfluity is large and abundant, then the oil should be of amaranth, or balm mint, or aloe, or aneth, for those resembling this."
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"But if the cupping glass has wide openings of tender flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and for this, the places for cupping near the cupping should be washed with cold or hot water of solatrum, or cumin water, or borago water, and similar ones."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	"And for that whose blood is of great humidity, wash his cups with sour wine, or myrtle and sumac water, and similar ones."
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	"And for that whose superfluities are large, wash his cups with old wine, or sage water (majoram), or decoction of aneth, or chamomile, and similar ones."
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	"And it is necessary that cupping be guarded before bathing; having to be administered near the time of bathing for an hour or two hours, and it is necessary that he sleeps near the cupping."
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	"What is it necessary that the person about to undergo cupping should guard before cupping."
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	"At the beginning it is necessary to consider: if the cupping glass or the one who should perform phlebotomy is choleric and vents on his acute and inflamed blood, then he should take causes of cooling, such as sour pomegranates, chicory with sour wine and lettuce, and secanolabum (scammony), and julep, and similar ones."
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	"And pause in their foods such as poleta (peacock), roasted birds, and sour seasoned foods, and similar ones."
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	"And for that whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he takes to drink hyssop syrup with almonds or hyssop syrup with seeds, and sumac, and moderately odoriferous wine between old and new; and that he be advised to use little drink and eat, and avoid foods of peacock, canary, pigeons, small birds, and doves."
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	"And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy he should drink more than eat food."
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	"And it is necessary that some hours before cupping or phlebotomy, certain people be given tyriaca altharac (an antidote), or musk medication, such as muscated, or alcelita, so that the principal members are strengthened and that the blood may be subtilized; and it is not necessary to take that scalfatz."
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	"The cups that are not followed by scarification are those that are paused on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra (gout), and on the navel, in the joints of the ankles, and on the hollow of the ankle, for these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	"And those are not desired except for the attraction of blood from the member, such as pausing cupping on the breast in illness of bleeding of blood from the nose; and they use it so that frozen cold cupping may be dissolved from the member, such as pausing upon the belly and the navel; because it rarifies the member, scalds it, and relaxes the pain because it resolves cupping."
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	"And cups are paused upon the lungs when there occurs in them opacity or phlegm because by the virtue of strong attraction it draws out opacity and expels phlegm from its place."
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	"And similarly, it does when paused upon the liver and spleen, because it removes cold cupping from those enclosed."
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	"And these cups are administered only with suction; some times they are administered with fire."
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	"And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in the illnesses of the spleen."
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	"This is why the cup should be filled and made larger, because cold water alone or water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been cooked."
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	"Form of cupping administered with fire: the opening of the cup should be as large as two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the mouth should be half a palm wide; and it should be placed on the side where there is swelling, in the location that is in the circuit, half of it, let the traction be small according to the amount that enters into it through a needle."
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	"It should be made of earthenware or glass, with thick walls, lion's foot, round, and smooth, so that it does not injure the member by its position upon it."
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	"And in the middle of it should be placed a transverse iron or earthenware wick, whereupon candle is paused with fire."
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	"And this cup should be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the smaller one according to the illnesses and the condition of him who uses it."
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	"The cups for infants and emaciated people are different from those for young people and robust individuals."
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	"The quality of pausing this cup with fire upon the member is that it should extend the mouth of the fire with decently dried wood before a small candle of wax, and pause that upon the middle of the transverse wick in the middle location of the cup, so that the fire may be kindled around the partition of the edges so that not the body of the sick person may be burned."
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	"And then it should be paused upon the member of the sick person, and let him hold that traction which we have said, until when we have the cups and do not need to hold the wick, because the vapor will rise over that traction, at that time the cup will soon be dissolved."
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	"Then immediately extinguish the mouth according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	"However, in cupping that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, there is neither transverse wick nor traction, and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water, and it should be paused upon the member only."
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	"And this is its form: The larger this cup is, the better, because it can hold a large quantity of water."
Capitol .xcvii.	"Chapter 97."
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	"Bloodletting is not administered in most members except in those where the position of cups is not possible due to their small size, such as the throat and gums, and similar ones; or in members that are denuded of flesh, such as the fingers and nose, and theirs."
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	"And the quality of using them is that if bloodsuckers are found, they should be in the muddy waters of ditches."
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	"And then they should be placed day and night in muddy water until they are hungry, and there remains no cause in their belly; and then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping; and then rub the member of the sick person until it becomes reddened; and then pause them upon him."
E cum son umplidas e caso.	"And when they are full, throw them away."
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	"If it is possible to suck the place with a cup, it is better in judgment."
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	"But if not, then wash the place with sour wine and then with much water; and let it be rubbed and expressed."
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	"If the body of blood is prolonged near the place of the bloodsuckers and it is much absorbed, then take a cloth of linen in hot water, and pause that upon it until the absorption is absorbed."
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	"When blood is abundant, powdered vitriol or wallflowers and similar astringent causes are applied until the blood is stopped; alternatively, sliced fava beans may be placed on the area and left until they adhere to it, at which point the blood will have been stanched."
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	"Additionally, if necessary, leeches should be used for bloodletting, whenever possible they should be changed."
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	"And if suspension of bloodletting is prohibited, then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the location until it bleeds freely. Afterwards, compresses are to be applied, because they adhere when they sense any bleeding."
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	"When you want them to stop, powder some ground garlic or salt or ash on them and they will soon cease."
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	"And thus begins the third section of the treatise: On Restoration."
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	"This chapter is very often necessary in the art of medicine, and concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations occurring in bones."
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	"O son, know that boastful physicians and common folk, who have never regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even a single letter from them."
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	"And for this reason it happens that the manner of the Ancients is not practiced in our land, and I do not wish to have been forgotten at any time; nor have I added anything below except by way of condensation for those who read the books of the Ancients and study them diligently, so that they may extract science from them."
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	"And therefore I direct you to experiment and study throughout the length of my life."
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	"And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which my experiment has passed, since here I have condensed it for you other physicians and freed you from the occupation of elongation; and I have condensed it to the end of condensation; and demonstrated it to the end of demonstration; and formed many forms of instruments that are administered therein, as is done by addition of demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters."
Capitol primier.	"Chapter One."
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	"Summaries and collections from the essence of fractures of bones, from which a premise is necessary before we begin to remember the members that are broken in diverse ways one by one."
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	"It is fitting that I should declare in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of my discourse, and the chapters which are intended for the understanding of those who will practice this noble art and who will stand firm on its truth; so that you and they may be prompt to know or learn it better than others."
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	"And therefore I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or collapse occurs, it is necessary for you at the beginning to perform phlebotomy on him or to alleviate his pain by some means, if no prohibition exists such as debility of power or if he is an infant or elderly or during intense heat or cold."
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	"And furthermore it is suitable to be content with light foods of fresh herbs and the flesh of birds and crabs; and prohibit heavy meats and filling foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, lest you be assured of a safe wound and lest you fear effusion of matter into the member."
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	"And therefore return the patient to his first regimen with which he is accustomed to live."
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	"And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be sustained with nutritive foods of much and heavy nutrition in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, capons, kid, fish, calf's belly, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar foods; and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture occurs more gently and easily."
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	"And know that the bones of children and old people are not able to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of the members thereof."
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	"And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature at all times due to the drying out of those members, and they are continued and consolidated in such a manner as the bones of small infants."
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	"But nevertheless nature adapts and connects itself over the broken bone in any way whatsoever, with some cause similar to glue that adheres and strengthens it until it is conglutinated together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, just as fire at the beginning, unless some cause prohibits it from its works."
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said."
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	"Great diversity in fractures according to the diversity of the member."
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	"And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves."
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	"And I come with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter separate from the others."
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	"Great diversity within itself."
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	"And the species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture other than stellar ones that occur therein; and sometimes they are fractured according to the length of the bone: these are called 'sagittal' and 'stellate' and 'additional' and 'non-additional' fractures, as happens when a reed is prepared to write with, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture."
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	"And for each species there is some specific pain or torment in its restoration, which will be remembered distinctly in their proper places."
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	"Many signs of bone fracture."
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	"And for this reason a bone fracture is known: its torsion and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and its shortening when you compress it with your hand."
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	"And therefore when there is no apparent torsion in the place nor is any made by your touch when you agitate the bone and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here."
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	"It is possible that there may be some torsion or small fissure, therefore you should not move it with your hand nor compress it all at once; but pause over it and apply the medications of which remembrance will come to you at this moment appropriate for the place; and furthermore it should be straightened by means of subtle manipulation."
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	"And know that the place where it is arched and not cut in two or otherwise than sagittally, when all separation from its companion has been removed, then you should begin immediately to correct it, provided that it does not have an open wound."
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	"And if it has an open wound, then leave it for some days until the wound stops; and furthermore elevate it in whatever manner you can of elevation."
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	"And know that restoration of it and approximation of it is easier than the bone where there has been separation."
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	"And furthermore strengthen it according to what will be remembered about it."
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	"But if there is a separation of the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both sides if it is the arm or leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand."
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	"And be in such a position that you hold the member in its natural shape while the separated parts of the broken member are extended; then it is necessary for you to return those additions with force and according to whatever manner you can place them back in their places."
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	"Be mindful of your strength so that you do not harm the patient through your actions or cause them injury; and proceed with caution according to your ability, applying one bone with its companion according to their best forms."
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	"Ensure that at that opportune moment you touch the patient with your hand, and if there is any diverse cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your strength."
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	"Avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish physicians do, causing an abscess to form through their actions or causing contraction in the limb."
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	"Appropriately annex and equate and perform the operation and binding of that limb correctly, ensuring rest and tranquility. Instruct the patient on this and have them avoid moving that limb during their watch and sleep times, and observe their movements and evacuations, and control all their movements with great strength; and ensure that the position of the limb is one where pain is secured, which is a cause for concern when the limb feels pain or injury. Therefore, you should change its position to another one where there is no pain. Ensure also that the position of the limb is correct and equal, so that the limb does not become twisted upon recovery."
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	"And the quality of the bandaging of the injured limb is what I recommend. For you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in their shape."
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	"And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand and foot, and similar ones, it is necessary that the wrapping be made with very soft cloth."
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	"However those that are large such as the thigh or leg, it is necessary to have a thick and hard wrapping in them, for the hard bandage connects the large member strongly on all sides with equal tension so that nothing enters between them."
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	"And appropriately begin by applying your bandage with pauses in equal parts over the location of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to how much the limb deserves, and strengthen your hand a little with the bandage."
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	"And appropriately go beyond that to the highest part of where the fracture is located and strengthen your wrapping more than before with which you have strengthened the location of the fracture."
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	"And appropriately extend yourself with wrapping beyond the location of the fracture a bit and slowly loosen your tension little by little until you reach halfway."
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	"And appropriately take another bandage and wrap it around the location of the fracture again with wrapping, and then go beyond that to where there are no wrappings. And your operation should be in the tensioning and loosening of the wrapping according to what we have said about the first wrapping above."
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	"And appropriately place cotton or cloth between the wrappings to equalize any twisting of the fracture if there is twisting. And if not, do not place anything in between them for any reason."
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	"And appropriately place another bandage over it and appropriately apply poultices made of suitable herbs at once if there is no inflammation or abscess. And then place something over the wound that will absorb the inflammation, and leave it for a few days. And then strengthen your poultice over it."
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	"And the poultices should be made of soft white lint cloth and properly formed. Or they can be made from oak wood or palm fronds, and each poultice should have this size and shape:"
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	"But the poultice that is placed on that fracture should be thicker and softer than the other poultices. And its length should be equal to the size of the limb in both magnitude and smallness. And appropriately strengthen your wrapping over the poultices with another bandage according to your first tensioning. And appropriate tie it down from above with a thread, as we have said about tensioning, so that your tensioning is greater where the fracture is located, and the farther away from the fracture, the less tension there should be."
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	"And the threads should be soft in size and fineness, and made of wool. And if the threads are thick, such as I have seen some people use who tie their threads with twisted cords, it is a great error when they try to make the tension even."
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	"And very fine threads are not convenient because you will not be able to achieve the tension that you want with them. And it is necessary that there is less than a finger's breadth between each poultice."
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	"And if the pain is felt at the ends of the poultices due to tensioning in those places, then place cotton or wool between them so that it does not cause injury."
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	"Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by swelling, and there can be disruption of the nerve in the cord. And I have discussed this in more detail in chapter two on singularities."
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	"And know that not every broken limb should be strapped with poultices on the first day. The reason for this is that when a limb is large, it does not necessarily need to have poultices placed on it until about two or three days after, depending on your certainty of the arrival of an abscess."
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	"And this is the manner in which the ancient surgeons treated fractures and dislocations using poultices that were placed on them."
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"The manner of poultice used in the treatment of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or friction. And you should take powdered mortar, which is the ground flour that comes out of the movement of the millstone on the walls of the mill."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And mix it in this way: sieve it with albumen from an egg, and use that mixture without making it too thick or too thin."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another way to make a poultice for treating fractures and dislocations is: Take asafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mustard, which is the resin of wild mustard, two drachms each; myrrh and aloe, one-half drachm each; alochil, twenty drachms; all are ground and sieved and mixed with bitter almond water or egg white if the condition is scalded. And use this poultice because it has a good composition and restores lightly broken bones, and is suitable for many people."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another way to make a poultice suitable for fractures and twists is: Take mustard and white lead, two drachms each; myrrh and aloe, one-half drachm each; acacia, six drachms; gum arabic, twenty drachms."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"All are ground in a mortar with a mallet and then sieved, mixed with water or egg white, and applied."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"A way to make a poultice for joints and separated bones in their places, and when there is accidental pain in those areas and for cracks and fractures: Take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and hot oil and place it on the location."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"But this poultice is not useful for healing, bringing an abscess to a head, or expelling pain properly."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another way to make a poultice that restores broken bones is: Take fig leaves from the fig tree and leaves of wild poppy. Count them all together and make a poultice of them."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	"An abbreviated method of administering a poultice for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remnant of an abscess: Take roots of white lead, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, oat flour, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with wine if the member is not scaled."
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	"If it is scratched, then cleanse it with warm water infused with coriander or simply warm water."
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method for applying a poultice that is stronger in resolution than the first one, when an abscess occurs during the restoration of the limb: take root of marshmallow and seed of it, and balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all finely chopped and mixed together; let them be crushed and cooked with water from the oak tree or sweet water or wine, everything according to the quality of the limb and its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be applied on the member for forty days during its restoration, but rather cerote made from wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it be between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But it is seen that Galen says they should be applied on the broken member during its restoration and the causes in which there is drying with little heat are such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Another way to make a poultice that alleviates injury and pain: take the following finely chopped ingredients and mixed together: wax, celandine, human skin shavings or bird feathers, marshmallow root, and salt; grind them well and sieve them; then cook it to make the poultice.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity of time that it should remain bound according to what is appropriate and when it should be unwrapped depends on whether pain or swelling has occurred or not; if the bone is broken, it is not advisable to remove it from its place too quickly. Therefore, do not untie it for many days unless there is no pain or inflammation.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if great pain or swelling or inflammation occurs at the place, then you should immediately remove it and apply another poultice to that area.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take some linen cloth and sea sponge dampened in hot water, and with that wash the affected area inside until the swelling subsides and the pain is alleviated; then let the limb rest for an hour. Next, apply over it a compress soaked in sour wine and oil or rose oil to help draw out any accumulated pus and reduce inflammation of the limb, ensuring that there is no further pain.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply another gentle bandage and small poultice over the first one, tightening it gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if at some point the abscess, heat, pain, inflammation, and all other symptoms have been completely alleviated, and you still need to apply a poultice and bandage, then do so in the same manner as you did initially.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no other cause from those that we have mentioned occurs at the limb, then you should not remove the bandage until three or four days have passed; sometimes even up to twenty days depending on how the limb appears when it is unwrapped, as we have said, ensuring that the fracture adheres and comes together with the coagulation of the flesh above it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the bandage more tightly than the first one, according to how the limb appears when it is unwrapped, and adapt it to the thickness of the swelling of the injured area.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if the area of the fracture becomes dry and emaciated more than necessary, then you should know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, immerse that area in hot water every time you remove the bandage; do this for three days altogether. Then loosen the bandage a little, which will allow nourishment to reach the limb and promote healing.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what foolish restorers of a fractured limb do when it is not set correctly from the beginning, setting it crookedly according to their own error and causing great fear, this has been greatly condemned by ancient authors in their writings.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone do such a thing, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter According to: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The varieties of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures occur from blows that break the bone entirely into the cavity, leaving the bone like a splinter, which is why this type of fracture is called 'disjointed'; or the blow cuts through part of the bone without cutting through its depth, and this kind of fracture is called 'elevated'.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The plague of these two fractures is great or small, and [it causes] fracture that is crushed or twisted; the cause of it is blunt impact with little force.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture is penetrating and approaches the muscle which remains on the bone, or it is located on the surface of the bone, with the plague being large or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And there is a fracture that becomes concentrated within the bone itself, in the finest hairs of the bone, which is why this type of fracture is called 'capillary fracture'.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And there is fracture caused by a blow or impact that forces some portion of the bone into its interior, which happens in concave locations like those of an egg when it receives an impact and its shell breaks inward.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Especially this occurs in curved bones such as the bones of the head.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	Broken bones of all kinds are weighed down similarly to stars separated from their orbits.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you shall return everything in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	We recognize all kinds of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry with gentle touches and observation of decayed flesh that is over them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	A capillary fracture is recognized by its appearance on the bone, it is cleaned and rubbed with touch, for where there is a fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the treatment of fractures, one must first consider the accidents of the disease, and then if they occur due to those accidents that have manifest significance, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of consciousness, fainting spells, acute fever, sweating of the eyes and redness of them, and similar appearances in major dispositions.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	But if accidents do not occur frequently, then you await health, but then you begin the treatment of it.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this is that if it has happened to you at the beginning as it was happening and this is during the winter days, then it is necessary that you study the bone structure before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is during the summer days, then you must extract the bone before the seventh day, having ensured that what remains of the bone is corrupted by the paniculum, and that the accidents which have been mentioned occur.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the paniculum covering the brain and is with small pieces and attrition, then it is necessary that you insert the comminuted fragment and attrition according to what I will recommend to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And that you shave the head of the patient and uncover the bone according to your custom and manner as much as possible according to the figure of the fracture, so that it is light on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you that you must perform the detection of the bone, fluxes of blood or a hot abscess, then you must pause for it with what is necessary, and this is that you wash the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and make the fracture rest until the abscess is sedated, and be sure of fluxes of blood; and then immediately begin with the circumcision of the bone and the ablation of it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two methods of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And one method is that you insert the bone with a narrow incision such as this: and immediately administer another incision tool, somewhat wider than the first: and this is its form:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"And then administer more of the incision powder than the second one."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"And it is necessary that you have various incision knives of different lengths, some of which are thicker than others; some of them are sharper than others and are very sharp at their tips, and they are made of iron or steel."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"And use them with ease in percussion on the incision to avoid hitting the head and harming it."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must first perforate around it before administering the incision knives, which are called non-depth knives."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"And they are not called thus because those do not reach the end of the bone where it is appropriate to use them, so that the knife has a rounded tip or edge on that side which is left behind, similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"And it is convenient that you take many of these knives, each one suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that in all tests of the brain, the tip is sharp, and its length and width are according to the thickness of this test."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"And this is the way of three types of knives:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"You are to now cut with the incissors whatever is between each joint of the bone, and you shall gather that thin pus which you can raise by levitation, as we have said before, so that you eradicate the bone, either by hand or by some other cause using certain instruments which you shall have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and subtle forceps."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"And be sure that the scissors do not touch any part of the skin."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"And then when you have circumcised the bone and separated it from the skin if it is continuous with it, you shall extract it, but first scrape and clean that in its roughness which is in the bone with another instrument similar to scissors, but nevertheless ensure that it be thin and subtle."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"And if there is any fracture of the small bones and you try to remove them with ease using whatever instrument is necessary, then clean the wound with linens and bandages which we have mentioned."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And another method of operation is light and distant from fear, which Galen describes as worthy of great praise; this is the manner of it: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the fracture of the bone in the place where the break is most evident and manifest, until when you have uncovered that fracture and paused with the end of this gentle and happy scissor which has this shape:"
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	"And the round end is lion-like and does not cut any skin, while the sharp end is like this in two sides lengthwise, thus; so that the round end fits against the skin with the sharp edge striking the bone."
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	"And then strike the scissors with a small hammer on one end until you cut all of the bone with ease as it revolves, and you are certain that the skin does not tear in any way whatsoever, and if the patient is the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, he was asleep."
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	"And then if any skin remains attached to the bone in certain places of the bone, cut that with the round end of the scissors and remove it easily, for it is removed without injury or fear."
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and what is cut off or removed from the bone is only its surface, and remains rough and sharp in places, then you must shave that roughness and remove those sharpnesses with subtle razors which you have prepared in different sizes so that it may be possible for you to use them in all places where they are most convenient and straight according to what you perceive the operation of the broken bone and its figure to be."
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	"And you must use in your shaving of the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and then immediately use the most subtle of them, and do not cease doing so continually until you have administered to it the thinnest and the most subtle of all."
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	"But in each of those other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer care according to what you perceive about their correction."
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	"And it is because not all those who have studied this art agree on this."
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	"And we have shown in large fractures what has been written about this."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	"And if the skin is torn when you remove the bone, then you must take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and dip it in rose oil and place it on the opening of the wound; and also take another doubled or tripled cloth, dip it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first one and do this as lightly as possible without pressing too hard on the skin; then apply a linen bandage over that and don't pull it too tight but only to the extent that the wound itself requires."
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	"And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure that the wound is dry and cauterized; then remove it and apply medicines which promote drying, such as linseed oil and powder of iris, and powder of aloe and tragacanth, and others like them."
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	"And if you make these medicines into powders that are finely ground and applied dry to the wound; generally speaking, apply any medicine that has the property of cleansing without biting."
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	"And be sure that the wound in your treatment is kept clean and not covered with grease or anything else; do not let it become infected; because when an infection sets in on the skin of the brain it corrupts it and causes illness, even death."
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	"And if an inflammation occurs on the face of the head, especially after the bone has been exposed and when its treatment is neglected, it appears black on its surface; then consider that if such accidents occur in the illness they are harmful without doubt."
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"If blackness does not appear on the face but only from the medicine applied to it, and this is due to the virtue of that medicine, then you must take a portion of honey and three portions of rose oil, mix them with linen cloth and apply it to the face; then treat it with the appropriate remedies until it heals."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter III"
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	"On restoring the nose when it is crushed."
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	"You should know that the nose is not broken except when two parts are crushed simultaneously and raised up, or one of those bones is displaced; because there are two bones in the nose, the left one being made of cartilage and not broken, but only bruised and twisted."
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	"But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the nose and reduce the fracture with the tip of your thumb inside and your other fingers outside until the nose returns to its natural shape."
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	"And have this done easily by you, taking care not to cause harm to the patient during the operation."
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	"And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you must use the tip of a probe with a small thickness."
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	"And if the fracture is in both parts, then you must perform this same operation on both."
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	"And be careful to restore it on the first day of the fracture if possible; otherwise, wait until the seventh or tenth day after the wound has healed."
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	"And also insert into the tip of the nose a wick made of cloth if the fracture is in one part or two cotton balls if it is in both parts; and they should be as thick as possible to fill the cavity of the nose."
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	"Some of the ancient restorers say that the cotton balls should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but I have not seen this; however, it is necessary that the wick be wrapped in egg white mixed with powdered mallow; then leave it until the bone has healed and the cartilage has hardened."
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	"Sometimes, instead of cotton balls, it is appropriate to insert pieces of lion's claw into the nose, especially when there is abundant pus and inflammation in the fracture of the nose, provided that the patient can breathe freely."
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	"This method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, or if you wish, use cotton balls instead."
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	"And if inflammation occurs again after the wound has healed, plaster the nose with cerote or cotton infused in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon."
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If there is no aposteme, cauterize it first with flour of sesame and powdered earth of iris mixed with egg white; then place a lion's skin on him, and do not allow him to raise his nose for any reason.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	If the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are comminuted, then you should apply splints to them and extract those that need it using appropriate instruments; then close the wound and treat it with something that adheres and consolidates, and use plasters suitable for that purpose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	If plague occurs inside the nose, then you should treat it with hot compresses and administer lead cannulae until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when it is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jawbone is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by plague, first examine whether the fracture is on the outside only, and whether it is not broken in two and curved inward at its edges. If so, its treatment will be easier.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Then, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and similarly for the left side with the right index finger. With this finger, gently push the bone edges together from inside while pressing the outer part of the bone together with your other hand until it becomes evenly aligned.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two pieces, then you should apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to achieve alignment.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is commotion and displacement of teeth, then strengthen those that you expect will break with gold or silver wire or thread. Then place a roller bandage on the broken jawbone, and place another roller bandage over it doubled. Then place a large, well-made splint on top, or use a piece of sole leather cut to the length of the jawbone. Then tie everything securely in place according to how you think is appropriate for that application, taking care not to cause further damage.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Command the patient to rest and avoid physical exertion, and have them take liquids slowly through a straw
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the bone has already begun to change shape in some way, then on the third day remove the splint and realign it. Then apply plaster made from powdered brick, egg albumen, or chickpea flour over the splint, taking care to first remove the cerotum. Then place a linen bandage soaked in oil over the plaster.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when the plaster is well attached and adjusted onto the bone, and there is no further displacement of the bone position, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and strengthened. For many times this fracture becomes solid in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another boil occurs later on, then apply whatever has been mentioned many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the boil has disappeared.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by inflammation, then consider whether it is due to a separated bone fragment or infection. If there are infected areas, then use whatever you think appropriate to remove them using suitable instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"If the opening of the wound is too narrow, then widen it using forceps according to your needs."
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	"And when you have finished those procedures and there is nothing left to remove, then if the opening of the wound is wide enough; otherwise, apply one of the plasters that are suitable for this purpose and cover it until it heals."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five"
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	"The repair of the collarbone when fractured."
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	"Often the clavicle is broken near its middle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways."
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	"When it is broken or separated, or separated into two parts without accidents, its repair is easy; when it happens as described in these procedures, its repair is difficult; when the fracture has an opening."
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	"And the procedure for this is that when the fracture has no opening, you should have two assistants present: one to hold the broken clavicle in place and the other to extend the neck at that point."
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	"And then approximate the fracture with the aid of those said above until it takes on the correct shape, and is not in too much prominence or concavity."
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	"And if you need more extension, then place the palm of your hand on the sick person's chest with a cloth or wool between them, the size of which should be according to the amount needed; and extend and elevate the clavicle and press the cloth with your hand until the fracture is approximated correctly."
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	"And if you cannot draw the end of the clavicle outwards to its proper position, then have the sick person sit up on their neck and place your palm over the muscle of the right shoulder with sufficient force."
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	"And the assistant should press on the muscle of the shoulder blade until the bone of the clavicle is elevated to its proper position, and then you should reduce the fracture and approximate it with the aid of these said methods."
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	"But if there are spurs on the clavicle that are painful, then you should cut over them and remove those spurs with ease."
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision into it with one of the knives that you have brought for this purpose, as you had placed the clavicle on the instrument that serves to hold it; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is like this:"
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	"And it resembles a spoon, the concave part of which should be according to your need, depending on the size of the bone or its prominence."
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	"But its length should be according to what is possible for you during the operation; it should have two extremities of this type, one broad and the other narrow."
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	"And if the disruption of the wound that you incised when you removed the spur from the bone is large and you are certain that there will be an abscess, then approximate the two lips of the wound with stitches."
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	"And if the disruption is small or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound."
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	"And if an abscess forms, then soak a cloth in vinegar, rose oil, and wine and place it on it."
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	"But the splint for the bone when it is without wound and section should be made with fine flour paste with egg white, and place it on a linen cloth, and if you need it, then press the palm of your hand over it. Then take a long bandage, about the width of a palm or more, and wrap it around the splint and the cloth, and then sprinkle powdered wax on it. Then take a thin board about three fingers wide and in length similarly, and wrap that in a cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the board over the site of the fracture. Then take a piece of soft linen and fold it in half, and then wrap it around the neck of the splint and the palm of your hand, and then reduce it over all parts, and when the reduction of the fracture is secure, this is what you should not conceal."
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	"And all of this should be done without causing pain to the fractured bone; and you should see the patient every day so that when the linen becomes softened or if you see the splint becoming loose, then you should correct this and tighten the bandage."
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	"And also make the patient sleep on their back and place a small cushion at the level of their shoulder blade during the night so that the assistant's arm is raised to the side and therefore the clavicle fracture is elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or the patient's arm can be tied to their neck."
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	"And do not remove the bandage unless it happens that there is discharge in the area or an abscess forms within twelve days."
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	"And also renew the plaster if you see it becoming wet in that place, and adjust it to the reduction and restore it and leave it until it is restored and the clavicle fracture has healed."
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	"And it is strengthened and comfortable in about twenty-eight days, but sometimes in some men it can be completed in less time than that."
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the Reduction of Shoulder Fracture.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The scapula is fractured on its lateral side and only the margins are broken, not the body itself.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is fractured on its medial side - and it is fractured in the middle of it - and only known by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture you should prepare for it and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that is possible for you.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And also place powdered flour with egg white and linen cloth on it, and then sprinkle doubled cloth powder on it. Then place a thin board splint according to the size of the whole scapula or a little more on top of it.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the splint is concave in some parts of the scapula, then you should fill that concavity with linen cloth and place the splint according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And also strengthen it from above with a long bandage with appropriate constriction and firmness of the splint so that it is not removed from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	Check the bandage every day, and whenever it becomes softened, replace it on another occasion and tighten it and adjust the splint if it has been removed from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Have the patient lie on their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The scapula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the bandage, and know for certain that it is of those bones whose union is not doubted nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed to the site of the humerus and place the elbow outside, then incise it there, leave it open, and do as we have said in the clavicle fracture regarding the treatment of an abscess if one occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	De fractura del colz e de restauracio d’ella.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	"For the restoration of a broken foot."
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	"The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and is displaced; however, its ends are usually intact but crushed."
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	"And when the middle of the foot is broken in an accident, it declines to the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood. The fracture is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	"And for the restoration of it, the patient should be placed on their back and a pillow put between their legs. The muscles of the foot should be pressed upon and the bones adjusted with two hands, taking care in the operation and ensuring that everything is done according to the best possible manner and what is convenient, until the bone returns to its proper figure."
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"And then apply plaster and cotton wool, and pause on a delicate wooden board or calico cloth, taking care to wrap it in cloth. And take care that it is placed upon the broken bone without moving it; and sometimes bind it around the back with bandages according to its roundness, and strengthen it with appropriate strapping. And also consider the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is necessary to provoke the removal of that [cast], because of corruption or pressure, pain, or an abscess that occurs in the place, then you cut and untie it, remove the plaster, and rectify what has happened there with a healing manner for it. And also reduce the plaster again, sometimes even its face; and adjust the strapping until it is healed."
Capitol .viii.	Capítulo VIII
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Chapter VIII: On the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	"Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large spaces that are on the back; and at the extremities of their ends, such breaks do not happen unless it is due to them being cartilaginous."
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	"The discovery of it is not hidden from sensation during its investigation with these tools."
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	"And the restoration should be done in such a way that you align the fracture with these tools according to the most possible manner, ensuring it is aligned properly depending on what is needed, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if necessary."
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	"And if the fracture of the ribs is displaced at its ends inside, then great pain and puncture will occur for the sick person, like the puncture that occurs in those who have coughed up blood, and because the bone pierces the pleura. And this causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting of much blood; and this is difficult to cure."
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	"And even the Ancients used this technique with many tools."
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	"And among the things they said is this: whenever foods are given to the sick person that causes inflation and windiness, so that the belly becomes inflated and extended, then the fracture will be pushed towards its ends on the outside."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	"But we would not recommend this because it could easily lead to an abscess forming if it is not done carefully. And even if it has already happened, then it will help with that."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	"And some among them said that it is better to remove the wind and then suck strongly with force; this is similar reasoning, but however it is feared that the wind might drive the superfuities to the place through weakness."
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	"And some among them said: whenever the place is covered with wool that has already been immersed in warm oil, and powders are placed between the ribs inside until it is full, then the wrapping should be done as evenly as possible according to its roundness; and then the sick person should be treated with dietary cure and medication for pleurisy."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"And if the sick person suffers from severe constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the pleura with sharp pain, then we fear for the sick person. Therefore we should make an incision over the place, uncover the broken rib, and then place on top of it the instrument called the 'cipher' which was previously mentioned. Then we should carefully insert the bone and remove it."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"And then we should join together the two lips of the wound if it is large using sutures, and treat it with plasters inside until it heals."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	"And if an abscess happens inside, then quickly and gently place powders in rose oil on the place, cover it, and treat the sick person with what is appropriate for an internal abscess."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	"And let him be propped up on pillows while lying down until he is healed."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter ix"
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	"A restoration of fracture of the spinal bones of the back and neck."
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	"Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they tend to adhere to each other, similarly to the spinal bones of the back."
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	"And if this happens to someone and you want to know if they will heal or not, then consider this: if sometimes the muscles are already softened, stunned, and dead, and cannot move those parts nor extend them nor straighten them, and when you compress those parts with your fingers or prick them with a needle, they do not feel pain in those parts, then know that it is not healing, and in these conditions it is mortal."
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	"And if those parts move and feel compression with your fingers or puncture, then know that the spinal cord is saved and the illness will recover with treatment."
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	"And if you see similar symptoms in the bones of the neck, then consider their weight."
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	"Now if you see that they are already softened, it has happened to those parts what happens in the muscles, and especially when lying on their back, there is shortness of breath and excretion without control, and sometimes they are suddenly reversed on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore do not bother with its treatment."
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	"But if none of these things happens, the condition is better and easier to treat."
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	"And the treatment for this is that you should apply a poultice made of hot cabbage leaves, smeared with honey and oil or crushed mulberries, and place it on the affected bone. Repeat this application several times a day until the swelling is reduced."
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply one of the comforting and heating plasters, and tie it on tightly. Command the patient to rest and remain calm, and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until they are healed."
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	"And if it happens that the bone is fractured or some other cause has already separated from it, then you should dry it with a bandage and expose the bone. Then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat it with a liniment of henbane until it heals."
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	"But if it is the end of the bone that has broken off, then you should insert your left thumb into the anus and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to its position. Then apply a poultice and plaster, and bind it tightly."
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"And if you feel that there are broken pieces within the wound, then remove them and clean out the wound. Then treat it with the previously mentioned treatment until it heals."
Capitol .x.	"Chapter .10"
De restauracio de la ancha.	"On the restoration of a tooth."
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	Bone fractures in wide joints are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only a communion at the ends of those and are inserted into the length and decline towards the inside; and it happens to the patient pain in that place and puncture, and the limb becomes stunned when it's fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And its restoration is that you stretch your hand over that side which is above the fracture which is its shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should align that according to what appears appropriate for equating an entry that is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that already declines towards the inside, then you should make the patient lie on their belly so that you can prepare for the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And then once you have aligned it, pause on that plaster, and also pause on that stick of wood or bone, and stretch with strictness over the one where there is no fear of puncture from fracture nor displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity with whatever you use to fill that entry so that it takes on the correct structure, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess forms, then you should cease the extension and restoration of it until the abscess is sedated, and pause on whatever sedates that according to what has been preceded. Then return to the restoration of it, and stretch it as is necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if this happens in the bone, then you should extract them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of a fracture of the ankle joint.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	"Aid is required between the neck and the top of the shoulder."
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	"And if it is broken, the restoration of it is done in one of two ways, of which one way is that you take a piece of plaster of moderate thickness and apply it thus:"
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	"And there should be attached at both ends two ligatures, and nearby suspended from the elevated location."
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	"Then place the patient on a chair; and nearby, gently place their broken arm on a flat surface so that it reaches its elbow in the middle of where the curvature of the bone is attached."
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	"And then suspend some weight above that, or the attendant should extend it towards the sides; and immediately the physician should apply the fracture with his hands together, so that the fracture returns as necessary."
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	"The other way is that the patient should be propped up on their neck and suspend the arm at the elbow with a ligature, and then command two attendants: one of them should hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other should hold below it; and each of them should extend to their respective side."
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	"And if you wish the extension to be stronger, then strain over the fracture with a ligature and over that again with another ligature, and each of the two attendants should extend to their respective sides."
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	"And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the ligature should be placed on the elbow and the other half below the fracture near the joint."
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	"And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then it is necessary that the ligature should be placed over that location and over that joint."
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	"Then place it gently and without difficulty, and immediately when it is placed according to what is necessary and applied with a good application, then strain it so that it does not happen that an ulcer forms."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	"But if an ulcer forms, then leave the bandage on for up to seven days, and place over it a clean lint soaked in warm water and rose oil until the ulcer has healed, and then strain it."
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	"And the way to strain it is: place plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a clean napkin over the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place his hand covered over his muscle."
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	"And then wrap the cloth and strain the arm on that support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless some cause prevents it due to the broken bone."
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	"And then use splints."
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	"And then place over the fracture that splint which is wider and stronger than the others; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on either side."
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	"And then strain over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	"And ensure that your bandage is as tight as possible around the location of the fracture."
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	"And when the fracture has been reduced, then make the bandage looser."
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	"And therefore if you see that the situation of the splints and the bandage is as we have said in the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do it."
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you fear an ulcer forming, then leave the bandage and splints on for up to seven days as we have said."
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	"And also consider the ligature in all cases for three days so that there is no pressing or inflammation at the location; otherwise, the food may not reach the limb due to an excess of tightness; therefore correct everything as we have said."
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	"But if you are in doubt that nothing will happen because of it, then do not remove the ligature for less than three days or more."
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	"And let his sleeping place be on his back, and let his hands be placed on his stomach."
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	"And place over the cooking stove full of wool on which to rest the limb, and consider at all times of night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not displaced nor dissolved, otherwise if the ligature becomes moist then correct everything with your own judgment."
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	"And give the sick person their food according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning until straining begins, and then it is necessary that you thicken the food for him."
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	"The custom of the splint and bedding is that they should be strained for forty days, and then it is necessary that they are removed and a bath administered, and treated with ointments which correct it."
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	"And if the fracture is laid bare, then do not remove the ligature and splints for up to ten days or up to two months."
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	"On the restoration of fractures of the arm."
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Brace is composed of two bones called radii; one is small and touches the said thumb, the other is large and is placed next to the small radius on its outer side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	When only the larger radius breaks, or when both break together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small radius bone is broken above, its restoration and healing will be easier
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	When it breaks below the fracture, the restoration of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse still when both bones break together
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone that is broken is the small radius above, it is convenient for the doctor to apply a small extension with ease while waiting for its healing.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large radius is what's broken, then it requires that a stronger extension be applied.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both radii are broken together, then you should apply traction quite strongly
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to apply the figure of the hand during the restoration and extension of it stretched out on a splint, with the wrist of the hand placed above all others, so that the ear lobe may be lower than the other fingers, and the patient may be sitting on a cushioned chair.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a splint placed in front of it at its height or towards it, so that the patient does not run into any trouble.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And moreover the minister should extend the arm of the party above with his own hand or with a sling, and another minister should similarly extend it from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And furthermore the doctor should heal the bone while reducing it into the best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then you should try to reduce them all back into their proper place with your own strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears in it a splinter separate that punctures the elbow and is not to your expectation in the restoration of it, then you should apply traction on it and reduce that according to the manner which has been described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with pus, I have already spoken about that specifically in another chapter, and therefore you should take care of it according to that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess forms at the beginning of your treatment, then you should lay a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and it should be medium between thickness and thinness, and press the cloth on it with subtle tension until the abscess is drained. Then remove the cerate and apply a plaster prepared from powdered mallows with clear egg whites, and also apply bandages; and the bandage that is applied to that fracture should be soft and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that in most cases the number of bandages for the arm is two or three, or there may be a fracture at one elbow or at both elbows together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And moreover you should apply your tension on the location of the fracture with great force and vehemence, and when it is more towards the upper parts above the fracture or towards the lower parts below it, then apply the tension a little softer according to what was preceded in the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the bandage with which it is pressed should be of medium thickness between thin and thick, as has been recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and its ligament for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if some cause occurs that requires correction, such as swelling occurring in the member, then you should immerse the member in cold water until that swelling ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	Let the member rest without pressure until it has paused, and then return to applying traction.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"If the swelling has already softened and the bone has moved back into place, then correct this with your skill."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"And consider whether the nutrition reaches the limb due to an excess of narrowing, for then you should soften that a little and let it rest for a few days until the nutrition returns to it, and then strengthen it."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"But if the illness has not occurred due to any of those causes mentioned earlier, then it should be allowed to rest for about twenty days or so."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"And then suspend the limb of the patient with your skill using agitation movements, and have them sleep on their back."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"And know that this fracture takes about thirty days or thirty-two days to heal, or perhaps it will take twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexion and the dispositions of the virtue."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII."
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	"Of the restoration of fractures of the fingers and toes."
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"I know that at the tip of the hand and fingers of these carts there is fracture, not just bruising many times seen."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	"And when there is fracture or bruising on the hand, it is necessary that the patient lie flat and in front of them place a pillow according to equality, and nearby place their hand over the extended one."
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	"And then the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor fits those together that are congruent with good congruence."
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	"And then it is necessary to apply plaster and gauze, if there is no cauterization; and then place a splint on top according to the quantity of the location, which you have already wrapped in linen cloth."
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	"But if the fracture is in the parts inside of the palm of the hand, then make a similar sling of cloth, and command the patient to press it against their palm with the fractured hand; also let it be bound with long cloth."
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	"And let the splint be of leather with cloth in which there is padding, so that the leather adheres to the palm; and bind it according to what is necessary."
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	"But if the fracture is on the outside parts, then it is necessary to place splints above and also another splint from the side part of the palm, so that the hand is straight and upright; and then apply the bandage, like when wrapping a rat's tail between the said bands."
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	"And if there is a fracture of any of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, fit it properly and bind it to the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint on the outside so that the fracture is elevated and not crushed."
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	"But if the fracture is in the other fingers, like that of the middle finger or the index finger or the ring finger or the little finger, then fit it and bind it with its own digit; or all can be bound together in continuity, which is better; or place a small splint on top as we have said for the thumb."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	"And consider, in your restoration of the fracture, and apply a cauterization if necessary according to what is appropriate for that operation; also consider the position of the abscess and oppose it with what is necessary when any cause of those occurs."
Capitol .xiv.	"Chapter XIV"
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	"Of the restoration of a bone fracture in the thigh."
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	"The bone in the thigh is often broken, and this is indicated by pain that increases before and during urination."
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	"And its restoration is performed in such a way that the ligament tightens over the fracture and other ligaments leave the fracture, and the patient lies prone on their stomach and face."
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	"And first, the surgeon extends all the ligament to its departure according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	"But if it occurs at the upper end of the thigh, then the ligament is drawn towards the hip at the departure of the penis, so that its extension does not occur inwards, and other ligaments leave the fracture."
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	"And similarly, if the fracture occurs at the hip joint, then the ligament should be drawn towards it, and its extension should be made away from the joints."
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	"And then the surgeon uses screws on both sides to reduce it according to its natural shape and join the bone with good union. Afterwards plaster and bandage should be applied if there is no inflammation of the limb."
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	"But if inflammation occurs, then leave it for some days until the inflamed area is reduced, and then return to your treatment."
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	"The bandage should be made in this way: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture and fold it twice or thrice, removing any excess; then wrap the knee so that it reaches the ankle and thigh."
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	"And then insert a long splint between the thigh and knee near the hip joints, and bring the ends of the splint from above the two parts, and wrap it around the knee and thigh removing any excess bandage."
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	"And then apply traction on the thigh at the location of that fracture, and apply a weight of one or two pounds on the bone of the knee."
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	"And then fill the spaces between the knee and thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandage is well consolidated."
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	"And then begin with a firm bandage on the middle of the limb over the fracture site with three or four layers, and as you move away from the fracture site, make your bandage thinner, lighter, and softer."
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	"And then extend both ends of the splint towards below until it reaches the heel of the foot, and tie both strings tightly on the other side so that the limb does not move from its place."
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	"And then leave the bandage on like this so that there is no infection or inflammation of the limb, nor any swelling or redness around it. And if anything occurs, take care to remove it immediately and correct it right away, as we have said many times."
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is pressed down and sticks out at one point, then raise that point as much as possible. And if it cannot be raised, then make a hole over it and remove what is causing pressure, and cure it according to what has been said before until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	"And sometimes this fracture of the knee is strengthened with strings in addition to those already mentioned, as we have said in the case of the adjuster and the arm."
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	"But however, in the restoration of the limb in this way it should not happen that the patient limps; and if it is restored alone without applying the other bandage, then it is necessary for the one who is always lame."
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	"And know that the knee is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter 15"
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	"On the restoration of fractures of the kneecap."
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	"Know that fracture of the shinbone often occurs suddenly, but most commonly it happens through direct trauma."
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	"But if the fracture has occurred, then it is nothing more than a break or wound in its parts, and this is accompanied by pain or sharp pain, and on top of that there is great swelling."
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	"The restoration of the patient is such that what has been broken in their limbs should be set back together with these tools, joined and connected as much as possible by equality, ease, and manufacture."
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	"And then place plaster on that round bone if necessary, and then press down with sufficient force as appropriate."
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	"And also consider all the arrangements which we have recommended in other fractures, especially those involving pus and similar accidents, as long as it is suitable for this patient to be treated."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	"The restoration of a fractured bone."
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	"Know that in the shinbone there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called by the name 'shinbone'; the other is slender and is called 'fibula'."
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	"And also know that in each of the species of fracture that occurs to both bones of the leg, restoration is done similarly to the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is one."
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	"And if both bones are broken at the same time, the shinbone becomes completely shattered."
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	"And if only the thinner bone is broken, the shinbone remains intact in front."
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"And if only the thicker bone is broken, it is the outer one that is fractured, and this is due to causes other than those mentioned above."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"Therefore, apply extension, traction, and splinting of the fragments according to the same principle."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"But it is necessary, if the fracture of the shinbone is located having many attempts, that extension be smaller and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And in the shinbone there is some cause for operation on the arm, which is when you align the fragments and complete all your operation; then you will take pieces of wood from a tree that has been felled nearby, and they should be made like branches of palm; choose those that are not too thick, nor too thin, and their length should be according to the length of the shinbone, from front to back."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	"And apply each splint over two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the broken shinbone on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from front to back, at the height of the ankle."
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	"And apply the two splints in three locations on both extremities and at the midpoint, for with this structure the shinbone is prevented from bending to the right or left, and it stands in good position."
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	"And also apply a splint of wood according to the length of the shinbone, and place it on it so that it retains its movement."
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	"It is especially necessary that you do this in fracture, and when with it there is proper healing."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And also examine the shinbone every day and study it carefully, and keep it away from infection, inflammation, or other similar causes. And when any of these causes occurs, then apply this again until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	"No fracture occurs entirely in the ankle; but fractures occur sometimes in the bones of the foot; and in these of the foot few fractures occur, and they do not occur except in cases of dislocation."
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	"And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones become elevated above each other, then the sick person should place his foot on the ground prepared thus while walking."
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	"And also apply the other foot on what is elevated by those bones and press them down, press hard, align them until they return to their places."
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	"And also apply plaster and bandages on it, and place a small table with two flat heads on the belly of the foot."
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	"And also strengthen that [ankle] with the foot with a descending support, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other things of which you have need."
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	"And when three or four days have passed, then unwrap the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, either joined together or dislocated, and the operation on these is as you know."
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	"But if some of them are joined together, then restore those and align them as I have told you and explained to you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand."
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	"And also apply splints on the joined fingers according to their length and place them somewhat aside from them. And also place this table which I have recommended on the foot, and strengthen it with descending support."
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	"But if what is joined together in the bones are two or three or more, then apply splints on each finger according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, with one of the heads of the table placed under the belly of the foot so that it retains it well."
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	"And remember that you should not forget to consider all the causes which are mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have spoken about, and apply this to every accident as it is necessary."
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the woman's pubic bone, of the hipbone, and of the penis.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	"When the pubic bone of the woman is fractured, then apply that in a padded cell, and also incline it somewhat to the side of the back, and let it be held behind."
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	"And also the midwife presses on the pubic bone and makes it like a sieve; and also the woman should be struck, and little by little raise her buttocks, for all this is forgotten until the pubic bone is placed before like a sieve and the fractured bone returns."
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	"And also apply powders on the back of it. And when she wants to urinate, move the cot with ease and let her urinate, and reduce it and return it according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return it to its first powder."
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	"And do this for seven days or thereabouts, for that is restored."
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	"And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen it on the back of it with a reed cane. And insert the entire bladder into the pubic bone and inflate it through the reed by blowing air into it until the bladder is inflated inside the pubic bone, for the fracture returns."
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	"And also press it with cotton and keep it at rest for some days as we have recommended until it is healed."
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	"And when the hipbone of man or woman is fractured, then administer in the restoration and reduction of it what we have recommended for the bone of the thigh."
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	"And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and which occur rarely, especially to those who are learned and understand this my book; for that fracture teaches you the correct way in the restoration and support of it, and therefore understand well."
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	"But in the penis of man when it is fractured, take a gourd of dough and place the penis inside it. And also apply over it wrapping with cloth and let it be wrapped, and then let it rest for three days or so until it is healed."
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of restoration of fractures of bones when they are displaced.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for that one to whom it happens that a bone is fractured out of place, and especially if the bone is large like the thighbone or the fibula, or similar ones, that you should carefully perform flebotomy on him at once if the conditions for flebotomy are present in him as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	"And if bloody flux flows out, then it is necessary that you apply pressure to stop it immediately, powdering sage three times on the wound."
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	"Therefore begin restoring the fracture immediately today and do not delay, lest an abscess occur."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	"But if an abscess occurs, then wait to resume the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has softened. And do not approach it on the third and fourth days of all, because you will cause bad accidents."
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	"But if the bone breaks through the skin and is visible on the shoulder, then it is necessary that you perform reduction promptly and cover it with soft dressings gently and without excessive extension."
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	"But if reduction is not readily achieved and the bones remain displaced despite your efforts, then reduce them using this instrument: it is made of iron, seven or eight digits long, and its width varies according to the amount of displacement. And thus the physician must have three or four of these instruments ready for use in all kinds of fractures."
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	"And if it is reduced, and there is a little hardness due to swelling, then apply pressure gently on it at the time of operation."
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	"And if it is an extremity with sharp ends that are next to one another, and the skin over it is thickened and swollen, then incise it along its thickest part and open it widely on both sides."
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And this is how it looks:"
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	"Named in Greek 'labre volentz atelarem', it is a rare disease."
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	"Why should the extremity of the bone elevated on the bony prominence be padded?"
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	"And press down on it so that it returns to its place, and remain like this for some time."
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	"And then try to align the ends of the fracture together, and if the fragment is small and does not fit well with the instrument, then insert the end of that bone inside so that the instrument has power over it."
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	"But if you cannot reduce the bone despite all that has been mentioned, then cut it with whatever instrument you have available among those which have been listed; or saw it with one of the saws however you can."
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	"And remove any sharp edges and small rough areas that remain on the bone."
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	"And when the bone is reduced and yet the patient feels strong pain on movement, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural position. And therefore do this which will give great relief to the patient."
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	"When your reduction of the bone is complete and then you apply dressings with black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer time, do not allow the patient to lie on a greasy pillow or any other cause where there might be oil, so that no corruption or decay may occur afterwards."
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	"And then apply splints at the time of completion of the reduction of the bone, and leave the dressing uncovered enough so that you can insert traction with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the dressing."
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	"And be careful that you do not strain the dressing over the fracture, for many times fools have done this and it has caused harm to their patients resulting in death or corrupting or damaging bone, which is very unhealthy."
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	"And if your reduction of the fracture is light and soft, differing from the usual type of reduction for fractures."
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	"If the dressing is large or a bad one, and you fear about those unfortunate accidents which have been mentioned earlier, and you find pain in the location, then do not rely on those splints, but make this wrapping of hard cloth instead of splints and bind it tightly with them."
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	"And when after one or two days the dressing begins to be warm in that place, then you remove the cloth which you had placed there with wine, and apply hot compresses, as we usually do for dressings, thus using such things as treacle and similar substances."
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	"And it is convenient that you remove the stitches and examine the dressing every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the corruption runs out of it easily towards the outer parts."
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	"If many days pass and the dressing is not consolidated nor does it separate from that warmth, then you would know that this is a case of inflammation for which you should examine the dressing with touch."
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	"And of those inflammations, those which are separated and removed and extracted are good, but those which do not separate and putrefy the member and cause pain, you should incise them according to what is possible for you."
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	"And if anything happens to the dressing such as swelling or blistering, then it is stitches or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction, therefore you should pause for one of those according to what has been described in its own chapter regarding its cure."
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	"And of this, let my speech be brief and you make your point: when the bone is crushed, it swells up over the member like the bones of the thigh and the forearm and similar ones in large members, and do not attempt to reduce or extract it because many times death has occurred through this; leaving that alone until corruption occurs, for it will fall off by itself after about twenty or thirty days; and then cure the dressing if you see fit, and if not, leave it."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter .20."
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	"Of the treatment of necrosis that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture."
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this swelling occurs during the process of healing a fracture, especially near joints, and it is caused by the member being in its usual position.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, iris, and myrrh. Mix some or all of these with honey, albumen of egg, or vinegar, and apply it on a bandage over the swelling, binding it tightly but not too tight.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	Let this dressing remain undisturbed for several days; then remove it and apply another one until the swelling has disappeared. Alternatively, place a lead plate over it, since lead has the property of reducing any swelling in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	If the swelling has already become hard and it is necessary to provoke a break in it, then cut through the skin along the line of maximum prominence using a scalpel blade. Excise the excess bone and remove any fragments until the swelling disappears. Then cure it with appropriate treatment until it heals completely.
Capitol .xxi.	Capítulo XXI
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Chapter XXI:
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When a bone fracture is restored, but the member remains delicate and brittle, this occurs only for several reasons: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligament not according to what is due, or by excess of constriction of the ligaments where nourishment cannot reach the member, or by multitude of useless embroilment; or by superfluous movement not at its proper time; or by lack of blood in the patient's body and debility."
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"To cure this, one must give the patient food to make their heart tender and multiply blood in them; they should also administer baths; and apply warmth and joy upon them."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"And then pause the pressure on the member, so that the pressure attracts nourishment to it, or continue rubbing it with warm water until nourishment returns to its normal state."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter xxii."
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"Regarding the treatment of bones that are broken crookedly and then restored, it is prohibited to operate on them for this reason:"
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"When the member has been restored but still retains signs of its former crookedness and prominence at the site of the fracture and node, although the member may not be prohibited from its natural operation, you should not accept the claim that it is newly broken."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"But many foolish physicians and restorers have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly to be condemned because it brings great danger with it, the sign of which is death."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if the limpness and nodosity are recent, then they should be rubbed with warm water in which softening herbs have been cooked, such as althea flowers and rose hips, and mallow, and similar ones; and a plaster of mollifying paste made from these should be applied, like that called dialaquilon when well-made; or fresh rose hips ground together with honey or oil of cinnamon should be applied as a plaster; or figs steeped in fat of pigeon should be rubbed on, and suchlike medicines named 'amermans consolidacio'."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes with frequent light friction it can be dissolved, especially if done with the most humid ones, and movement of the member should be encouraged in all parts at all hours."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if the crookedness has already appeared and is strong and hard, and has turned into bone and there is a need for its treatment with iron, then it should be cut away as much as possible above where the continuation of the bone has dissolved, and what is superfluous from the node of that member should be incised with subtle scissors, and ease should be given to it through diligent study."
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	"Concerning dislocation."
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of certain joints from their proper place, causing them to lose their mobility and altering the shape of the limb, which leads to great pain and injuries for the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And therefore it is necessary that at the time of inflammation, the joint should not be moved or stretched, because often this causes spasm and severe pain.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, then you must cover the patient with a blanket and let them rest until the inflammation subsides. Then the limb should be wrapped in hot water and oil, and finally it should be gently reduced.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the limb should be treated with whatever will bring the memory of its former position back to mind.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And now I have ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been previously stated in fractures, from the division of the body into upper and lower parts.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	When both jaws are dislocated, they are not difficult to reduce. Dislocation of both jaws occurs in two ways: either the mandibles are displaced from their normal positions by slight movement and become softened a little; or else they are completely dislocated and must be softened at the point of articulation until saliva begins to flow from the mouth, indicating that it can be opened and closed again. The tongue should be wrapped in cloth during this procedure.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position on its own with no cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and full, then gentle reduction should be administered promptly, without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And let the attendant hold the patient's head, and the physician insert the tip of his thumb into the groove of the mandibular dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he insert both thumbs together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others hold the patient's hands from outside with which they stabilize him. And command the patient to cease biting down and relax each side in turn; and the physician guides the mandible back into its proper place."
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	"And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both mandibles are dislocated at once, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil until it becomes easier to reduce both, and do not prolong the reduction of one side while delaying the other, as we have said."
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	"And when they return to their proper places and the mouth of the patient is closed but not relaxed, then apply powders made from cloth with wax and rose oil; let them be made of wax and rose oil; and let them be applied with ease using soft linen."
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	"And let the patient sleep on his back with his head propped up between two pillows, so that he does not bite down on anything at night; do not force him to eat or drink anything. Let his diet be soft food until the pain is gone and the jaws are healed, then he may eat what he wishes."
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	"And with this administration should be done easily and gently, without forcing the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or any other purpose until the jaw is healed."
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	"And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and do not return to their proper places, then often a fever occurs along with continuous thirst, and sometimes there is vomiting and copious purging."
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	"And when this happens, know that it is a serious matter, for many people have died from this within eight days."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter .xxv."
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	"Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the end of the muscle."
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	"The collarbone is not dislocated from its inner side due to its continuity with the sternum; however, sometimes it can be dislocated on its outer side, which is noticeable by touch."
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	"And for the reduction of this dislocation, let the patient lie on his back and extend his arms."
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	"Then press upon it with your palm firmly until it returns to its proper place."
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	"And then apply plasters and powders and strengthen that."
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	"But the end of that which seizes the lung and is attached to it does not become dislocated at any time. Therefore, when it needs to be reduced, do so according to what has been said above."
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply plasters, powders, and bandages to that place, and order the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until he is healed."
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	"With this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it has become separated from its proper place."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter xxvi."
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	"Of the reduction of dislocation of a muscle."
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	"You should know that a muscle can only be dislocated in three ways: one being at the point of attachment to the tendons on either side."
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	"The second way is when it is dislocated at its midpoint above the muscle, which rarely happens. It is not dislocated behind by the shoulder nor in front through the nerves."
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	"And most often it becomes dislocated and protrudes at its attachments on either side of the tendon, especially in those with little flesh where it is easily dislocated. But in those with much flesh, it protrudes with difficulty."
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	"And often in some men there occurs a blow or fall, and the muscle becomes inflamed with an incurable abscess, and it is dislocated by that."
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	"Therefore, you should first remove that before it becomes entirely hard, and then proceed with its treatment."
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	"It is recognized that the dislocation occurs at its attachments on either side of the tendon. Therefore, you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, for there is a clear difference between them. You will find concavity in the head of the muscle on either side of the tendon, which resembles a chicken's comb. The patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move that limb."
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	"If it is dislocated towards the sternum or upwards, you will find a clear and obvious touch."
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	"And this dislocation can be easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child."
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	"And the reduction of this dislocation is performed by raising the patient's hand above his head. Then place your thumbs on either side of the tendon below it and raise the joint with force upwards to its proper place while the patient raises their hand and extends it upwards. Then press upon it with your thumbs as it returns easily."
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	"But if it does not return as described above and the dislocation has existed from the beginning for many days, then the patient should be immersed in warm water and treated with an embrocation that softens and moisturizes it like this: take a decoction of ale, linseed, and honey mixed together."
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	"And then the patient should be propped up on his back and wait for it to become loosened between elevation and pressure. Then the physician should place their heel upon the prominence and raise the head of the muscle with force while pulling the patient's hand so that it is not hidden at its attachments, and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it does not move from its attachments until that muscle returns to its proper place."
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	"And if you wish, you can reduce it in this way: Have present a man who is taller than the patient and stands on that side. Insert his muscle between the tendons of the patient's dislocated muscle and raise the tendon upwards while the patient hangs suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand from the attachments on their abdomen."
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	"But if the patient is light, then another cause should be suspended with him so that he may hang heavy, for the dislocation returns quickly."
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And it can be reduced in another way: Take a long pole with a round head like a mortar pestle that is neither too thick nor too thin. Place it on the ground and have the patient stand beside it with cloths of lions placed upon its head. Then have the patient stand along the length of the pole, extend their hand to the other side, and lean their body across with force so that the joint quickly returns to its proper place."
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	"And if it is difficult to reduce it despite all the causes mentioned above, then use this treatment: Take a pole that is two cubits long and four fingers wide. Its thickness should be tapered at its end towards the tendon like this:"
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"And then place lion's cloths on its round head so that the pole does not injure the patient."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"And then place it beside the tendon of the dislocated muscle and extend the hand or arm over the pole so that the pole is bound to the assistant's arms and the end of the hand."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"And then place the arm upon a ladder according to its width and extend the hand to the other side. Suspend the other half of the body on the other side so that the joint may enter quickly."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	When the application of remedies has been completed in any manner possible, then place a soft wool wick dipped in a suitable quantity of olive oil; and immediately apply a prepared plaster made from powdered myrrh with incense and albumen of egg over all the muscle, so that it is wrapped around; and then bind the wick with a proper binding; and let the linen be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of the patient be tied to his neck, and let him be left thus for seven days without removing his hand.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	The sick person should abstain from food until the limb is strengthened, because it facilitates recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then gradually increase food intake after seven or eight days and exercise the limb; if it becomes firm without softening, then it is healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs in it or for another cause, then cautery should be applied there with three triangles, according to what is said earlier in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the binding is removed and the joint is not firm, and the plaster and bandage are repeatedly reduced upon it, but it is still not firm and catches, and he cannot raise that arm above his head, then you should know that the nerves of the arm which are at the head of the muscle have been either cut or stretched or softened; and you should realize that the joint will never be firmly fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	For reducing the dislocation of that which has happened you should place the elbow and shoulder blade or the parts behind it; reduction is made with pressure and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply another bandage there and care for it until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is heaviness in the limb during recovery and slowness in the movement of it, then the patient should use baths many times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its former nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the hip joint.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The joint of the hip is displaced with difficulty and returns with difficulty; that one is displaced in all parts, especially in front of behind, and its displacement is not hidden from you when it appears leaving an empty appearance or leaving a palpable touch depending on how it is displaced, and when you reduce the displaced hip joint into its socket, that is clearly declared to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg nor touch itself with that muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	You must reduce the dislocation immediately before an abscess forms, because if it comes to form an abscess, reducing it will be difficult and its healing is not guaranteed; and especially when it happens at the back parts, for it is worse than all other kinds of dislocation and causes more pain and often leads to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And its reduction, when it is possible to reduce it, is done by extending the arm with two hands and expanding the elbow, and placing the physician's hands on the joint and pushing it back into place with the palms of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm facing inward as it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is at the front parts, then it returns in this way: by bending the arm with his hand, pressing on the joint with the edge of his palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer strong extension and much force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is necessary that two assistants extend the arm and hold it firmly in place with two hands so that it does not move during extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And moreover, let the arm be turned around on all parts, because it is wrapped in doubled long cloth or linen.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that this may help to lubricate the joint and facilitate its reduction; and moreover, he should push the joint back into place with a strong impulse until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after its reduction, it should be placed on an empanel with sternutory and expectorant properties made of album of wool, and it should be bandaged with a descending compression bandage, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left at rest for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And after it has healed; and then if the joint is formed in its place, you should remove the linen from it and leave it alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strong, then repeat the emplaster and linen, and leave it alone for a few days until it is strengthened; and then remove it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens that there is pain around the reduction of the joint and the condition of the limb is in motion, then administer humidification with baths and gentle friction, compression, until it is alleviated; or place on the joint an alleviation bandage, which is a fatty ointment; and then bind it, leaving it alone during the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that bandage and put him in a bath; and when he gets out, you should rub the joint with gentle friction, and then apply again over it alleviation bandage, which is a warm ointment, once, twice, and three times.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	And meanwhile keep bathing him until it is well healed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place over it a wet and scraped cow's hide with its edges stitched together and stretched over it tightly; do this several times, for that is humid and reduces swelling of the condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the treatment of dislocation of luxation, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Sometimes the hand becomes dislocated and its reduction is easy, whereas with other joints it is difficult. However, care must be taken to reduce it quickly when it happens, before the place becomes inflamed or an abscess forms.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the hand joint of the sick person on a table and the physician extends his hand towards him, placing his palm or his fingers on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been dislocated onto the front of the hand, then the sick person should place the back of his hand on a table with his fingers extended and the reduction performed. But if the dislocation is posterior, then the position of his hand should be placed internally on the table, so that the physician's hand may cover the prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	"And thus if it returns soon, good. But if not, then immediately press with an embankment to drain the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat this, for if you do, neither will it suffer nor can you achieve reduction of the pus over time."
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	"But in any case cut through the Roman join according to its tortuosity; and do not reveal any cause to the patient, but that your hand is tired and cannot grip anything; however you know that the nerves are pressed or torn, and therefore heat it with a cautery near its exit and then give some reason for this."
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	"Therefore when the pain returns, then pause over the embankment that we have recommended, and let it be left and pressed for seven days; and afterwards it shall be released and let it alone, and his hand exercised."
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	"But if the movement of it is obstructed and there occurs in it any gravity, then use that with cold water and friction several times until it is alleviated."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	"Concerning the treatment of dislocation of these joints."
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	"Some times these are completely dislocated."
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	"And when some of these fingers are dislocated at the back of the palm or at the front of it, then seize the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns."
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	"And afterwards support the head of the finger, and suspend that above the part where it is dislocated, and let it alone for two days."
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	"And afterwards suspend that and extend it until it is completely healed within that day."
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	"And when it is not completely healed, then apply that according to the said narrative, and do not cease to release it during the day and exercise it with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is firm."
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	"And do likewise if it is dislocated at the front of the hand, and bind that at that articulation and perform with it your first operation until it is healed."
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	"And do likewise in this manner when it is dislocated at other articulations."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	"Concerning the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	"When there occurs at some of the vertebrae of the back or neck a complete dislocation, and several vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that case there is no cure, for death quickly overtakes the sick person."
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	"And a sign of this is that the evacuation of the sick person is involuntary and he cannot retain it; and many times some members of him are paralyzed or both arms of him or both legs of him, or one of those; or one vertebra is removed from its place, for many times several are removed and many times the dislocation occurs in four directions."
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	"Therefore that is already removed from its posterior articulations and is called 'gibbosity'."
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	"But the treatment of it is that then you should consider if the gibbosity occurs in childhood, for then there is no cure nor is there salvation from all."
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	"But concerning those which occur through compression or percussion or in similar manner to those, the Ancients have already described the methods of treatment at length, from which the greater part returns with profit; but I have already abbreviated that of which little excuses the multitude of it, due to my proximity to the intention of this exposition, with which I have briefly explained and formed various instruments for demonstrating this and expounding it."
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	"And I say that in gibbosity which occurs at the anterior part of the foot there is neither relief nor salvation for it; and similarly in that which is made on both sides."
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	"And only those are cured which occur properly at the back with what I have counted."
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	"And that the sick person should be placed on his face with his neck bent near to a wall, and be supported from below with soft cushions so that he is not harmed in his feet."
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	"And place a straight stick horizontally, put it on the ground at the end of the neck around the head of the sick person, and another stick under his feet at the other end of the foot."
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	"And let one assistant hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a socket; and another assistant should hold the other according to that form."
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And wrap around the head of the sick person and tie it on tightly with linen and extend the end of the linen to the stick which is above his head, and bind that there; and then stretch the other linen over his hips down to his knees, and place that against his thighs; and then adjust all the linens and bind them onto the other stick which is above his feet."
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	"And then each assistant should extend the linen to the part of the stick and let not the two sticks and the linens of their places be removed from where they are placed, but nevertheless they should not be fixed in that way as we have said."
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	"And the physician should place his palms on the vertebra with strength until it returns, or he may place a table there and then adjust his feet on the table until it returns."
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	"But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia and hollow out in the wall which we have said is near to the sick person a place into which the end of the table can fit."
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	"And then place the middle of the table on the vertebra, and the physician should place his feet on the other end, and stretch well until the vertebra is compressed and returns to its place."
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	"And if you wish, open with a twist using the hand; and this is how you should do it: lie down on the ground in front of the head of the sick person between the two sticks whose length is one braccio, and place your feet between the two sticks similarly; and let the distance between each stick be one palm, and already made in each stick is a hole through which the cord passes, and let each be firmly fixed to the ground so that it is not moved."
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	"And place a round stick on which is the cord, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks."
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	"And on one end of it is a hole in which the stick is formed, whose length is one palm with what is turned; and the two other sticks have something similar to that."
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And then stretch the linens which you have stretched on the foot of the sick person in the hole which is above his head, and the linens which you have stretched on his buttocks in the cord which is above his feet."
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	"And then above each cord let there be an assistant who turns the cord with his hand, and the physician should press the vertebra as we have said."
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	"And this is the form of the twist:"
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	"And then when the vertebra has returned and the place is closed, it is necessary that you should place a poultice with alum of chalk and lint; and then place on the poultice a piece of cloth from a table whose width is three fingers or thereabouts, and whose length is about as much as the place where the gibbosity occurs."
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	"And then bind it with linen as we have said, and feed the sick person on soft food until he is healed."
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	"And if there is any inflammation remaining in the place at the end of healing, it is necessary that medicines which soften and cleanse be administered with application of the table for a long time, as we have recommended; and a lead plate should already be applied to that place."
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	"And sometimes inflammation occurs in the back of the hipbones due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which is already inclined toward ruin, so that this medicine should not be applied to it, because much harm could come to you from it."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter 31."
De curacio de anca dislocada.	"On treating a dislocation of the hip."
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	"You should know that the junction of the hip and the junction of the muscle only suffer dislocation alone, not those with small movement and concavity."
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The hip joint is dislocated in four ways: either inward or outward, forward or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It is most commonly dislocated inwardly and less frequently anteriorly or posteriorly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	The sign of inward hip dislocation is that when you press the healthy limb against the affected one, it feels longer and more prominent than the healthy one; the patient cannot flex their thigh and has to be guided by another person who takes hold of the dislocated limb to reduce it.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of outward hip dislocation is that its symptoms are opposite those of inward dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of anterior hip dislocation is that when the patient extends their limb fully, they cannot flex it without pain and cannot walk with the affected leg in front; urine retention and an abdominal mass are also present. The patient walks with a limp and supports themselves on their heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	The sign of posterior hip dislocation is that the patient cannot extend or flex their limb at the hip; the affected leg appears shorter than the other and the buttock feels flaccid. The main feature is pain in the groin region.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, reduction of the different types of hip dislocation should be considered if the dislocation is chronic and old, as it may have become fixed in a certain position. In such cases, traction should be applied according to the specific position of the limb, but not all cases require reduction. If reduction is attempted and fails, no further manipulation should be made at that time.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	In cases of recent hip dislocation, one must first reduce the joint and then extend the limb at the hip both anteriorly and posteriorly. This should be done gently on both sides as the reduction may be completed by simple traction without further manipulation being necessary.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	If reduction is not achieved by simple traction, then a strong and continuous traction should be applied to the limb from below or by elevating it on pillows. The other assistant should hold the patient's hand above their head while another pulls gently on the distal end of the limb. A third assistant may apply gentle counter-traction at the hip joint using a bandage wrapped around the thigh and held firmly in place.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The limb should be extended or traction applied internally from the anterior hip to the greater trochanter or externally from the posterior hip to the lesser trochanter.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	All of these reductions should be done in one attempt while the patient is lying on their back with their buttocks just over the edge of the table, so that they are hanging down.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This method of reduction is common to all four types of hip dislocation.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	If the hip dislocation is reduced using the method described above, then that is sufficient. However, if it is not reducible by closed methods, then specific treatment for each type of dislocation will be necessary.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	For the closed reduction of an anterior hip dislocation, the patient should be placed on their side with the affected limb up. A bandage is wrapped around the thigh and held firmly at the point between the greater trochanter and the head of the femur. Traction is then applied to the leg in a direction from the anterior aspect of the greater trochanter towards the anterior superior iliac spine.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Another assistant should firmly grasp the patient's arms and push their body away from the affected hip while applying strong traction to the leg externally. This may help reduce the dislocation as it allows the femoral head to slip back into its socket.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This method is the easiest and most common way to reduce an anterior hip dislocation.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	If the hip dislocation cannot be reduced by closed methods alone, then both of the patient's legs should be elevated simultaneously with gentle traction using two assistants. One assistant holds each leg just above the ankle and pulls gently while the other supports the buttocks from below to keep them elevated.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	Each leg should be elevated about 4 digits ( approximately 10 cm) and the affected limb extended an additional 2 digits (approximately 5 cm) more than the other.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	The patient should then be suspended by their arms from a traction apparatus or pulley system while lying on their back. The affected limb should be extended with gentle traction until the limb is approximately 24 inches (60 cm) off the ground.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	A strong assistant should then grasp the affected leg just above the knee and apply gentle traction while another assistant applies counter-traction to the body by pulling gently on the waist. As this is done, the hip dislocation should reduce spontaneously with a characteristic "clunk" as the femoral head returns to its socket.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	For the closed reduction of an posterior hip dislocation, the patient should be placed in the lateral position with the affected side up as previously described. The assistant should then grasp the leg just above the ankle and apply gentle traction while applying counter-traction to the body by pushing the opposite shoulder gently towards the table.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Two vertical posts should be placed on either side of the patient's leg. The posts are connected by a horizontal bar that is positioned over the affected hip and used to apply traction. A padded U-shaped bar can be inserted into this frame to keep the posts from slipping out of place during traction. Wet towels should be wrapped around the post and bar to prevent skin irritation or burns due to friction.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	Each assistant should then apply gentle traction to their respective side while the surgeon uses one hand to guide the reduction of the dislocation according to the technique being used.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if the hip dislocation is not reducible by closed methods alone, gentle traction should be applied according to the principles of gelboze reduction as previously described.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	However, it is important that the patient lies quietly during the procedure and does not move around excessively.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	For hip dislocations that are anterior and inferior (obturator type), gentle traction should be applied to the leg with the patient lying on their back. The surgeon places one hand on the affected greater trochanter and uses the other hand to grasp the thigh just proximal to the patella. Traction is then applied by adducting and extending the leg at the hip while maintaining flexion of the knee.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	For posterior hip dislocations, the patient should not be placed in extension as this can cause further displacement of the femoral head. Instead, the patient should be positioned on their back with a pillow or firm support under the affected buttock to elevate the hip slightly. The leg is then positioned in slight abduction and external rotation with the knee flexed, similar to the position used for shoulder dislocations. Gentle traction may be applied if necessary, but this should not cause pain or discomfort to the patient.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	Additionally, compression should be applied using a bolster placed between the ilium and ischium on the affected side where the hip joint was located. This can help stabilize the reduced dislocation and prevent redisplacement.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	After successful reduction of the hip dislocation, the surgeon should extend both legs and observe for signs of instability. The patient is then turned on their unaffected side while a spica cast is applied to maintain the reduced position and prevent redisplacement. The patient should be kept at bedrest for 3-4 days until follow-up X-rays confirm maintenance of reduction.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	After 3-4 days, the spica cast and traction device are removed, and the leg lengths should be checked by comparing the lengths of both legs from the anterior superior iliac spine to the medial malleolus.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if no instability is appreciated on examination under anesthesia, the patient can be allowed to bear weight as tolerated.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	However, if any signs of instability are noted during examination under anesthesia, the patient should be re-casted in slight traction for 3-4 days before allowing weight-bearing again.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	Approximately, it means: 'And then untie that one, and make them stay in bed for several days until they are recovered.'
Capitol .xxxii.	'Chapter XXXII'.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	'On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw.'
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated towards the outside, towards the inside, or more commonly towards the back. It is not usually dislocated towards the front.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	"The sign of dislocation in this case is when you tell the patient to press their knee against something, and then you know that it has been dislocated."
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	"To restore the dislocation of this knee, you should make the patient sit on their right side so that they can extend their leg if possible; then attach your left hand to the front of their thigh and place your foot between theirs. Quickly bring your right palm behind their kneecap, hold it firmly with both hands, and another servant should extend their foot inward until the kneecap returns to its proper position."
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	"The sign of reduction of this dislocation is when the knee joint adheres firmly with light effort."
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And afterwards plaster that and make the knee adhere firmly with the joint, and also bandage it tightly with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind it."
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	"And do not allow the patient to walk around for several days until they are healed and comfortable."
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	"If reduction of it by you is excused, then administer strong extension with linen strips, which were mentioned in the previous narration of hip joint treatment."
Capitol .xxxiii.	"Chapter XXXIII."
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	"On the Treatment of Ankle Dislocation."
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	"The talus sometimes becomes displaced due to slight movement, and sometimes becomes dislocated completely, and this dislocation occurs either on the inner or outer side."
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	"And the sign of talus dislocation is that often the talus becomes swollen at the site where it has dislocated."
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	"But the treatment for displacement of the talus is gentle reduction, and this is done by extending it gently with the hands until it returns to its proper place."
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	"But in the treatment of complete talus dislocation, it is necessary that the patient lies on their back and that they have a strong and reliable assistant standing behind them at the middle point of the dislocation."
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	"And then place your right hand above the upper part of the foot and your left hand below the foot at the level of the ankle."
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	"And then traction is applied with the right hand on the foot and with the left hand for two times, after which the left hand extends [the foot], and with the right hand pushes the heel up without turning it."
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	"And this should be done twice as we have described."
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	"And then on the third attempt, push the heel up again until you reach the ankle joint."
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	"So if [the talus] returns in one or two attempts with this method, and if the foot is swollen, that is good; but if not, then repeat the procedure until it returns."
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	"But if reduction of the talus with this method is prohibited, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and use a sturdy stick placed firmly on the ground to wedge between the two sides of the dislocation, and then wrap them up in cloth for fear of frightening the patient."
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	"And then the assistant holds their part [of the dislocation], and another assistant extends the foot with their hands or with a bandage placed on the neck of the foot; and each assistant extends in turn, while pushing the stick firmly between the two sides of the patient to prevent the body from being pulled towards the side of the extension."
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	"And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant holds the healthy part on the outside to prevent the dislocation from returning."
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	"And thus when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the reduction has been achieved, then apply plasters and bind [the foot] strongly with bandages, and tie the foot with bandages at the heel."
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	"And be careful or guard against the nerves which are behind on the talus, so that the bandage is not too tight and does not hurt them severely."
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	"And then leave him for two or three days; and if the bandage has softened, remove it."
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	On the third or fourth day, untie him, and forbid the patient from vomiting for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forced to go ahead of that space, it cannot be guaranteed that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and thus it would not receive treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an ulcer forms from the cautery, you should then apply what is described above in our narrative, in another place for treatment and embrocation, until it is removed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the said hips.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that he who has been dislocated be wrapped with little extension without moving him; and it is not difficult, carefully doing so.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some knots of the two thighs, you should then have the patient place his sick leg over something on the ground or on a table, and let him be thus as if he were walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on the leg, and place your foot over what you have indicated of the joints, and then press that with your foot with strength until it returns, and make sure that it is wrapped and does not appear again in its prominence.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place the leg of that side on a table that takes all the leg, which should have two heads, and then stretch it with proper and firm bandages for three days; and then untie it and let him rest from walking for more days until he is strengthened and recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	"Types of dislocation caused by plague or fracture or any injury."
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	"When such causes occur, if you attempt the cure and restoration of it, often death succeeds."
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"And therefore one should not presume about the cure of it unless he is knowledgeable in this art, experienced, merciful and compassionate, cautious, not reckless or presumptuous; and that from the beginning [he uses] medicines that only cauterize wounds, leaving the patient to divine judgment and hoping for salvation from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, where there appears some hope."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	"And then strive quickly to reduce it at the beginning of the cause before an ulcerous wound forms."
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	"And then if the limb returns as desired, immediately administer treatment that will prevent ulceration and heal the inflammation with whatever is suitable for it from drying ointments."
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	"And if dislocation with fracture occurs and the ends of the bone are separated, then you should perform their reduction and do in this what we have said previously about simple dislocations as described above."
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	"And guard and avoid, according to your ability, that which is within the paths of fear as much as you are able; for this is better for you to owe to your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more helpful to your true body in your time."
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	"So ends the words of Al-Bukhastis perfectly, may God bless them."
Amen.	"Amen."
