Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	"Thus begins the words of Albucasis."
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	"Oh, sons, since I have fulfilled for you this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, to complete it and its consequences, and by its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I accomplish that for you with this treatise, which deals with the operation by hand, that is surgery."
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the operation by hand is greatly hindered in our region and time, so that few know its science, and its traces are almost lost; indeed, there remain only a few descriptions of it in the books of the Ancients, which have been obscured over time, their meanings changed, and they have fallen into error and obscurity, such that their intentions are hidden and their strength is weakened."
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	"And it seems to me that I revive this with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and also adding illustrations of the shapes of the instruments for cauterization and other tools necessary for the work, and preparing them, which is necessary."
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	"For the reason why there are not many good practitioners of this craft in our time is because the art of medicine requires that its practitioner be skilled in anatomy beforehand, knowing the arrangement of limbs and their forms, connections and separations; and having knowledge of bones, nerves and ligaments – their number and function; also of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places where they discharge."
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	"And therefore said Hippocrates with his name, but in practice little, and especially in the art of surgery."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	"But we have already said at the beginning of this book that whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy will surely fall into error and cause many deaths of men, as I have seen too often."
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced surgeon open an escrofulous swelling on the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die immediately."
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	"And I saw another surgeon who took it upon himself to remove a stone from the bladder of a man who had fallen into that state, and the stone was large; he came near him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that the man died on the third day."
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	"And I had already foreseen that outcome and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient's illness, he would surely die."
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	"And I saw another surgeon who was paid a fee of one ducat by our lord to perform surgery, and he undertook the case of a black man who had a fracture of his thighbone; preparing himself with great ignorance, he reduced the fracture without leaving any space, with pillows and stones under strong pressure, and did not allow space for respiration."
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	"Then he bound him up according to his desires, then released him and let him lie down again for some days, commanding that they release the bandage; and so it happened that the thighbone became inflamed and putrefied, and he came to destruction."
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	"And I was called to him, and prepared to remove the bandage; but as soon as it was removed, calmness returned, and his pain ceased immediately."
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	"But nevertheless the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so that I could not prevent it, and the corruption did not cease to wander throughout the limb until the patient perished."
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	"And I saw another surgeon who perforated a cancerous swelling, and it became ulcerated in a few days, so that the evil was increased by its lord."
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	"The reason for this is because the cancerous ulcer is full of melancholic humor, therefore it should not be cauterized with iron on all sides, but only on the part that suffers from inflammation."
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	"And therefore, children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: on the one hand is the operation associated with health, and on the other hand is the work where there is danger in the greatest dispositions."
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	"And I have already spoken about this throughout the whole of this book where operation is associated with error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and leave that alone, so that foolish men may not find an opportunity to speak and dishonor you."
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	"Therefore take up your arms with diligence and protection from God, and treat your illnesses with skillfulness and firmness."
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"And use the best way through the grace of God to obtain health and praiseworthy success, leave behind terrible illnesses of difficult healing, show your arms against what makes you fearful, so that steadfastness in your faith and in your name does not desert you: for greater is remaining in your glory, and then in the world and finally in your sanctity."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	"Since I have already spoken in some of my books:"
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"No medical illness, so that bad doctors are not appointed."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have already divided this book according to three chapters."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Here begins the division of the book, first of the first part."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter ordered concerning the head, in the forms of instruments and irons for cauterization, and what is necessary in the operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"Here begins the second part."
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter concerning cautery and perforation, and cupping glasses, compresses, and extraction of arrows and similar things, all ordered according to the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"Here begins the third part."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter concerning reduction and dislocation, and the cure of torticollis and similar things; this chapter is ordered according to the head, in the forms of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"Concerning cauterization with fire and with sharp medicine, and remembrance of the operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"And with this begins the treatise of the entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"It is necessary for me to speak about the qualities of those caustics and their effects, and in what complexion cautery is prohibited."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the discussion about the quality of cautery and its effects is long and prolix, subtle in science, and secretly hidden; many wise men have already spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, but for me it suffices to touch upon some of their discussions briefly, fearing prolivity."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"And therefore I say that cautery agrees with every universal complexion, whether it has matter or not, except for two complexions, which are dry without matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the case of a dry and hot complexion that is out of balance; some say that cautery is beneficial for this, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for an illness that is due to heat and dryness, as fire itself is hot and dry, and it is inappropriate to use something hot and dry to treat a condition that is already hot and dry."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And he who says the opposite, that cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, argues that when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find them alike."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say, based on what that person says, that I have already experienced this many times."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"But it is not necessary for me to repeat what has already been said and practiced in the chapter on cautery through recent exercises, having learned about the diversity of men's complexions and the disposition of illnesses in their bodies, as well as their causes, accidents, and duration."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in other complexions, there is less fear for you, especially in hot and humid illnesses, because all physicians agree on these matters and are not disagreed on the use of cautery in them."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, son, that the secret of cure by cautery with fire and its benefit is about cautery in medicine that burns, because fire is simple, whose action only extends to the member being cauterized, and it does not extend to another adjacent member except with some damage."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of burning medicine extends to those who are near it and often causes difficult-to-heal illnesses in nearby members."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But fire, due to its sublimity and good substance, only serves to superfluously remove excesses. And we are already familiar with this through experimentation and the length of our service studying this art, which reveals the truth of these causes. Therefore, I am excused from speaking at length on this topic. But if it were not forbidden to me by law in this passage to reveal this secret about fire, and its qualities and operation within bodies and its expulsion of illnesses through philosophical demonstration, which would illuminate your minds."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, son, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cautery and prefer the best time of spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by accidental timing is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn out by cautery. And especially if the cautery is performed for pains or necessary remedies for severe and persistent pains, which cannot tolerate delay, because it is feared that something worse will come about, which is greater than the small damage caused by time."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And do not think this in your minds, children, for only the common people and foolish doctors estimate that those illnesses cured by cautery are completely incurable at all times, and they put up with that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the reason is not as they think for this, because cautery is only a substitute for medicine that alters complexion and dries out the moistures which are the cause of pains."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But cautery is superfluous in addition to medicine due to the willingness of its value and virtue of its operation, as well as the greatness of its power."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"But it is possible that its illness will return at some time due to the complexion of the sick person and the location of their illness, as well as the virtue of cautery and what has been prepared in the body from the aggregation of excesses within it, and what was acquired by it in nutrition and similar causes. But the illness in which cautery is administered is one that is subtle in a member with few superfluities and moistures, such as toothache for pain and similar things, it is possible that this pain will not return, but this happens rarely."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is quite true, because they believe that there is nothing beneficial in it beyond cautery itself."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"And the reason is quite contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine means only when one uses the methods of treatment in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help. And therefore, cautery is administered at the end of the disease, and it proves beneficial."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And hereafter let it be understood that cautery is the last resort of medicine, but not in the sense that vulgar people and many foolish doctors understand it."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this not because of any other reason than the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the location of cautery does not make a scar, which is not absolutely true, because I have already seen and proven that this is only the case in certain bodies without others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not declared to you, because it depends on the quantity of gold you want due to its luster, and because it prepares to receive friction. And if you adjust the ignition above it, the gold will melt from the fire, and some sheets may fall into the fire due to the occupation of that."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And for this reason, cautery should be performed with iron more lightly and more carefully in terms of the correctness of its operation."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among them for now. So that later when someone asks about something related to it, they may find what they want."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"Regarding cautery for headaches caused by coldness and moisture."
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers upon the humid and cold nature of the servant's accident. Its two causes are coldness and great quantity of fluxes from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, flowing abundantly, causing much sleepiness, toothache, and headache; universally it causes all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, sodden feet, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The manner of this cauterization is as follows: firstly, you shall command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to what you judge necessary based on the strength of the illness and the age and habits of the patient.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then have him sit on a smooth bench, placing his feet upon the stones of the floor.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then place your palm close to his nose between his eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But when the illness reaches its peak, mark that spot with a tent, and immediately light the olive-oil cautery of which this is the shape:"
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	"And then gently place that [cautery] on the marked spot so that it descends gradually, allowing your hand to be scorched little by little, and you turn it."
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	"And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot. If you see that some of the bone has been exposed, about as much as a grain of barley, then lift your hand; but if it does not return to its former state, replace it with another one until you see what I told you."
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	"And then take a little salt and dissolve it on that spot and let it sit for three days."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	"And then place [a bandage] around the wound and leave it until the fire's scar is destroyed."
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	"And then heal the wound with tetrapharmacon until it is healed."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"And they said that when the wound remains open, it's better to tie the arm, as this is more beneficial."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"And some of them said that the tendon should be cauterized within the bone, and hold the cautery there until it burns a part of the bone's surface."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"Then scrape away what has adhered to the bone, then apply treatment."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others said that when the cautery reaches the bone, it should press down strongly until the bone cracks; this is the way to perform a small trepanation."
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"The vapor of the head escapes from this place."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	The wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it has healed.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen this type of cauterization in all cases, only in some men due to fear; and that one, it seems to me, is better with regard to health when it happens, because the head is uncovered by solution of continuity from it just as we have testified in other members, and even more so when the head of the patient is naturally bald.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And that first type of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion, and with that one and with that operation there is health.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When there is chronic and long-lasting pain in the whole head and this is prolonged illness, and it is treated with plasters and ointments and poultices and emplasters and warm water and cabbage leaves and linseed poultices and similar remedies, especially if it has already been cauterized once without benefit from any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head has a strong constitution by nature; if it is not thin or weak in any way, then cauterize it again with another cautery near that first one.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And cautionarily cauterize that over the horn of his head with a cautery within which the chain is broken.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Break the chain and uncover the bone as much as we have indicated and cauterize it with a cautery in the last part of the head where it is called "the fontanelle" - that is the place where cupping glasses are applied.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And soften your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone because the illness suffers great pain different from all other cauteries of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say this cautery in its place because it is necessary to cauterize with the same cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput, for that cautery is more subtle than that with which you cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cautery treatment for non-acute migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When sudden pain occurs in the part of the head or when there is continuous pain inside the brain, let it be evacuated with medicines that cleanse the head and let the other treatment which I have described in previous sections be administered. And if none of this helps, then cautery treatment may be done in two ways: either cautery with an acutely burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The cautery with a burning medicine is as follows: take a dish of salt and dissolve it in vinegar and then separate the extremities from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then make an incision with a sharp lancet in the location of the pain on the temple within the area where the chain lies beneath the skin without exposing it.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	"Then press upon them with a firm grasp for a descending constriction, and leave them thus for the space of three hours; then untie them and draw them out, and leave the plaster on for two or three days, then pause over the submerged area with a wet cloth until the place becomes warm."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat that wound until it is healed."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"If you wish, perform some warming medicines which I have written about in the second book of warming remedies."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"However, the cautery with iron is done in this manner; heat the cauterizing iron until it glows red-hot:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"and is called nail clamps because its head resembles the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in its middle there is a small prominence."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And then press the cauterizing iron onto the area of pain, keeping your hand steady so that the heat is not scattered, and slowly move the iron back and forth with speed."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if the quantity of the cauterization is as great as the size of the wound itself, lift your hand away quickly so that the artery that remains open does not become cauterized, for fear that blood flow ceases."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then soak a piece of cotton in saltwater and apply it to the area, leaving it there for three days. Then rinse off with warm water, and then treat the wound until it is healed."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"If you wish, cauterize with the tip of a knife according to cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this migraine specifically."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Four."
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	"Regarding the cautery of an ancient headache."
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	"When you treat a headache with the methods we have mentioned previously and in the divisions of illnesses, but find that it is not effective, then it is necessary to heat the cauterizing knife until it glows red-hot. Then apply your hand to the location of the pain for a moment and press down firmly until you cut through the skin and reach the bone."
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	"But it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is moved by chewing, and ensure that the nerve is not cauterized or burned, and that there is no spasm."
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"And concerning the care and caution regarding blood flow from the artery that is opened, for there is fear in such an opening, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is untrained or inexperienced. Leave the operation to someone experienced at the beginning."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	"And here we come back with a reminder of the method for controlling accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner in the place where this book is located."
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And if you see this illness not helped by the cautery and that the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it is healed."
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	"And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on ligation of an artery with cautery using two knives, for this is a better and more certain cauterization."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five."
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	"Regarding cautery for ear pain."
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it has been treated with laxatives and other methods mentioned earlier but the pain persists, then heat the cautery instrument called 'punctum,' which has this form:"
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	"And then apply the cautery to the ignition point, and move it around the entire ear like a wheel, or in circles around each part if the pain is in one specific area."
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	"Gradually apply heat with the cautery to the opening of the ear, little by little, until you feel the location with your hand."
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	"And if you apply cautery at several points around the entire ear and it relieves the pain, then treat those locations until they are healed."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter Six."
De cauterizacio de turtura.	"Regarding cautery for strangulation."
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	"Strangulation that is cured with cautery only refers to those types that come on suddenly due to blood clots, as we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses."
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	"Avoid cautery for the type that comes on due to dryness or spasm of a nerve."
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	"When you treat that type of strangulation with remedies and expectorants but find that your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient at three locations: first, at the opening of the ear; second, a little below the temple; and third, at the junction of the two lips."
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	"And pause your cautery on the side opposite to the affected area, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healed."
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	"The method of cautery is to cauterize with the cautery instrument on the right side of the ear's tip slightly above the horn of the head, and also on the temple on the other side, the length of which should be according to the length of a finger. Then pause your hand with the cautery until it burns as much as half of its circumference."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	"This is the form of the cautery instrument, and it is specifically for use by surgeons. Its form is shown in front of this table."
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	"Nevertheless, even more subtle and precise than this one is the one you see here. It is necessary to use a knife instead of excessive coarseness."
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the location with what is described as the process until it is healed."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter Seven."
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	"Regarding cautery for ancient apoplexy."
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	"When apoplexy has become chronic and you treat it with the methods we have described but find that your treatment is not effective and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them at four locations: on all of their cranial bones; in the middle of the head as we have mentioned; and on the nape of the neck."
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	"The method of cautery is done according to what has been described above."
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	"And it is also cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; this is the last step. And then treat with what you process."
Capitol .viii.	"Chapter Eight."
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	"Regarding cautery for fainting caused by blood clots."
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	"It is necessary to give the patient large diuretics and pills made of blessed thistle at the beginning."
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	"And then shave the head completely for the patient, and pause on their nape where the plaster of lead is placed, as described in the treatise on plasters."
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	"And pause there several times, for this is the method of cautery."
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	"Do what you have been told according to that order I have mentioned."
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	"And then if the patient is healed well with that, do so. But if not, then apply three cauteries on the last part of their head, which should be descending from the highest point of the head down to the lowest point of the neck."
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	"Pause between each cautery for the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cautery with what is processed."
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	"But if you make an addition and the patient is tolerant of it, then apply cautery in the middle. And if you wish to make an additional addition, then apply cautery on both cranial bones."
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	"And then treat until healed. And let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form shown above."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter Nine."
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	"Regarding cautery for paralysis and softening of the entire body."
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	"It is necessary that you process in clarification of the head with diuretics and what we have said. And then shave the head of the patient, and apply cautery to them on the middle of their head, on all of their cranial bones, on the last part of it, and apply three cauteries on the spinal bones of the neck."
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	If it is necessary in the illness of body softening due to too much coldness and tolerances, and the illness is severe, then cauterize with four cauteries on the shoulders of the back, and afterward apply a cautery entering near the base of the neck of him, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	Afterward, heal him until he is healed, then cauterize with olive oil cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cautery for epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, first cleanse the brain of him with hellebore at the beginning and also use the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the illness is great and does not respond to medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer purgatives and chew hellebore for him, before that for several days, with proper diet of foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And afterward shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery on the back of his head, and cauterize each of his horns.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and does not respond to medicines, then cauterize him with the cauteries mentioned above, having paralytically softened and mollified his body over the vertebrae of the neck and back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive oil according to what is preceding.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterizing with subtle cauteries in this manner:
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries that we have mentioned previously, having paralyzed him.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive matter that declines to melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then he should drink hellebore to cleanse his brain according to what has been mentioned in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And afterward shave the head of the patient, and then place a well-prepared plaster made from dove's dung on his head in a circle, and afterward remove it from the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be kept quiet and restrained from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And afterward apply a liniment; and afterwards it is fitting to apply powder of ram's testicles.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat him over the fire with moderate warmth according to his endurance when placed upon him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And afterward place him on the middle of the head in a circle and let him remain until he is warmed up.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once each week until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him with small points according to his strength, but hold your hand thus with a cautery arranged in this manner: This is the type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And afterward apply powder made from the ashes of wool or flaxseed.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	"For burning off descending water from the head."
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	"When you have declared the beginning of water in the head by its signs that I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and guard them from all humidity."
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	"And let them take a bath with warm water for several days."
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Approximately command him to raise his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of an epilepsy attack with water in both ears, or on one side if it begins only in one ear.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Make incisions with cauteries on all the veins and arteries that are located near the neck; the cauteries should be of such a length as to reach the level of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful about blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any blood flowing, remove the cautery with some medicine that you have available.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And bring along knowledge about extraction of arteries and ablation of those, as well as caution regarding blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	Sometimes it is cauterized in the back of the neck near two bones with two cauteries perpendicularly applied.
Capitol .xiii.	Capitol 13
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Regarding the cauterization of old tears (i.e., treatment of chronic blepharitis or conjunctivitis).
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears from the eyes are excessive and continuous due to veins and arteries in the visible area of the head being obstructed by a superfluous flow of serous fluid, then cauterize as follows: with the cautery mentioned at the beginning for watery discharge in the ears, and with another cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on either side of the temples, and with two cauteries on either side of the two bones in the neck.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you need to add more, then cauterize also on both sides of the cheekbone above the outer corner of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Capitol 14
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Regarding cauterization for foul-smelling breath (i.e., treatment of halitosis).
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat someone with the remedy mentioned earlier and it does not prove effective, then prepare and give them to drink the decoction for three nights. Afterwards, shave their head and cauterize it as follows: first with a cautery in the middle and then with an olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And also cauterize with a clove-shaped cautery on both eyebrows above the hairline using two cauteries.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to burn the artery (i.e., avoid damaging blood vessels).
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	This is the shape of the clove-shaped cautery:
Capitol .xv.	Capitol 15
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Burns for softening eyelids
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid is softened by illness or humidity, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is how it is done:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	"If you wish, cauterize that area on both eyebrows with two small cauteries, separated from the temples."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	"And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow present."
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	"Press the cautery gently onto the skin, so that only a third of the eyelid's thickness is burned."
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	"Regarding cauterization of the eyelids when the hairs inside become inflamed and pierce the eye."
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	"When the hairs of the eyelid become inflamed and penetrate the eye so that it is pierced, there are two ways to cauterize them: either by burning or using medicinal remedies."
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	"If cauterizing with fire, command the patient beforehand that they pull out their hairs like those who are plucked for depilation, ensuring they are lengthened and hardened; and if one of them pierces near its origin, then immediately stretch the eyelids using a bandage so that it is not bothered until the hairs have grown back."
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	"When the hairs have grown back and hardened, then pause the patient's head against a wall, and holding the eyelids open with one hand using a tent-like device made of linen cloth, bring the cautery close to the base of the hairs."
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	"And hold the cautery wrapped in wax or pitch-plaster over the eyelid."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape."
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	"And then cauterize over the figure that you have traced, little by little in many places until the surface of the skin appears like a boxwood leaf."
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	"A sign that your work is complete is when you see the eyelid of the eye begin to contract and its hairs rise up from the puncture wound."
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	"And then raise your hand [from the cauterization] and leave it for three days. After that, touch the area gently around the scar until it has healed."
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress it with gauze until it is healed."
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	"But if the hairs return for some reason and the eyelid becomes softened again, then perform the cautery once more just as you had done initially."
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	"But if the hairs remain on the eyelid and it droops downwards, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position, closed, and the hairs do not obstruct the eye."
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"But during cauterization with a burning medicine, you should command the patient to raise their eyebrows until they are fully extended and closed. Then, make a template of boxwood leaf shape from card or cloth."
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	"And then take some known soap and live coals and mix them well together quickly so that it does not cool down. Then spread this mixture onto the card template shaped like a boxwood leaf, and place it over one or both eyes. The patient should keep their eye covered with a damp cloth while keeping their head still."
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	"And then place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without moving until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	"And when the patient feels that sensation of being bitten, then lift off the medicine and move it with your fingertip; once the biting sensation ceases, remove the medicine and rinse the eye with water. Then observe whether the eyelid has risen as it should be when lifted by the restriction with fire or incision, for sometimes it is necessary to repeat the operation until the eye is completely closed."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	"And then place a border around it so that the edge of the wound is properly sealed. Then dress it with deaffection or another suitable dressing until it heals."
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	"And you must be very diligent to ensure that no particles of the medicine fall into the eye during your operation. And if the eyelid becomes inflamed after several days and some cause of hairs obstruction occurs in the eye, then repeat your application of the medicine on that area which is inflamed, just as you did at the beginning. And then surround it until it heals."
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"And this is the shape of a boxwood leaf template:"
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and thus your cauterization should be adjusted accordingly."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"And it shall not be hidden from those who wish to learn this art correctly."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	"Of the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye."
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	"When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not improve, then you should cauterize it in this manner: Have the patient hold their head still with their chin on their chest, and have someone else hold the patient's head firmly between their thighs so that it is not moved or shaken by the patient's own head."
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	"And then place a hot iron in a boxwood leaf template or in pitch on the eye of the patient."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then heat the cautery, which has this shape:"
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	"which is heated, so that it resembles the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather at its tip where the cautery is made."
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	"If you wish, let it penetrate slightly into the other extremity."
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	"And if you want, let it come out like this:"
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	"But rather use the one that is heated for better results."
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	"And then press on the fistula if it is open, and draw out its humor and dry it."
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	"But if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	"And then take the cautery which is well heated and place it near the eye but not too close to the cautery of the eye at the opening of the nose, so that you do not err with your hand or cause discomfort to the patient. Then place the cautery on the granuloma and burn it."
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	"And thus if at the beginning of your cautery it enters the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary, and leave it alone for three days. Then dress it with a dry dressing until it heals."
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	"But if after eleven days it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what you consider necessary in this chapter."
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	"And there is another method of cautery for fistulas which some first said: Take a narrow knife and cut into the location of the fistula. Then place in that fissure a subtle thread of lead, about one inch long. Then take it up with tweezers while holding it firmly so that the molten lead does not fall into the eye of the patient. And then place this on the eye of the patient covered with a boxwood leaf template or water, for lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it wonderfully."
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction of the nose and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to what will be written in its proper place."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	"Of the cautery of the fissure of the eyelids."
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	"Fissures occur frequently in the eyelids, and more so in children's eyelids."
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	"So when you treat those fissures as we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not beneficial, then heat a small cutting cautery of this shape:"
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	"And let it be heated according to the sharpness of a needle."
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	"Then carefully place that heated cautery in those fissures until it reaches the edge of the fissure."
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress it with wax until it heals."
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	"Of the cautery of a fistula in the mouth."
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"When an abscess forms on the uvula or palate or at the roots of the teeth and it bursts and becomes chronic, forming a fistula which you treat without success, then you should heat a cautery according to the size received in the fistula. Then insert that heated cautery into the tract of the fistula until the hot iron reaches the edge of it. And repeat this once or twice. Then dress it with what we have said about treatment until it heals."
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	"And if the healing is separated and healed, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to expose the location and scrape out the rotten bone according to what will be written in its chapter."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter XX."
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	"The cauterization of teeth and the softening of vessels."
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	"When vessels are softened by moisture and teeth are moistened, and you treat them with medications but they do not improve, then place the head of the patient on a cloth, and quickly bring the cautery iron, as shown here. Thus, hold the jawula over the tooth and insert the cautery iron into it quickly, taking care that your hand does not come too close so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth."
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	"And then remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times according to what you desire."
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	"Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out, because the moist tooth is solidified and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried."
Capitol .xxi.	Here is a translation of Chapter XXI:
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	"Of cauterization for tooth pain."
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	"When toothache is caused by coldness, or there is heat or worm in it, and the cure does not work with medicine, then cauterize it in that place in two ways: either cauterize it with a red-hot iron or cauteri with fire."
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	"To cauterize with a red-hot iron: you take a piece of red-hot iron and place it on the coal fire, then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of the toothpick, and quickly immerse that in boiling water. Then apply that to the painful tooth immediately before it cools."
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	"And repeat this several times until the power of the heat reaches the root of the teeth."
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	"Now if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the aforementioned boiling water, place it on the painful tooth, and then apply that hot iron to the groove of the tooth until the iron reaches its point."
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	"But however the cauterization with fire is done: you wait until the coal or iron is red-hot, and it should be in the middle of the fire some distance away so that the heat does not reach the mouth of the sick person."
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	"And then ignite the cautery in whatever shape it may be, place it on the tooth and press it there with your hand until the cautery cools. And do this several times, either that day or the next, until the pain is removed."
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	"And it should be noted that after this cautery, the patient should rinse their mouth with good water and hold it there for an hour, and then spit it out. And this is the form of the cautery."
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	"And cauterize with whatever you wish according to what is possible for you."
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	"And this is the form of the canal:"
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of the cauterization of external haemorrhoids.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When external haemorrhoids are composed of fatty matter and humors that are resistant to digestion by medications and you wish to digest them thus, then you ignite the cautery that has two ends closed so that yes smoke goes through one end, and place it on that pile once or twice until it reaches its point."
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	"And if the pile is small, then place the cautery according to its quantity, and then leave it for three days and apply it to the cotton immersed in boiling water until what the fire has burnt is removed."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with ointments and bandages until it is healed."
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	"And the form of the canal or cautery for such a purpose is as follows:"
Capitol .xxiii.	De cauterizacio de internas haemorrhoidas.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	"For cauterization of a sore throat and constriction of the breath."
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	"When humidity comes over the canal of the lung, especially when it is with coldness of complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and also cauterize that place on the root of the uvula in the depressed area."
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	"And make sure not to burn the uvula with the cautery nor burn too much of its base."
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	"And cauterize that place with another cautery on the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it."
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	"And the cautery of it should be done in such a way as described before."
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"Moreover, treat that with what is prescribed until it is healed."
Capitol .xxiiii.	"Chapter XXIV"
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	"For cauterization of lung disease and cough."
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	"When cough and lung disease are from moist coldness, and the disease does not have fever nor spitting, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that place with two cauteries over the furcula in the depressed areas of the lungs and breasts; and with another cautery in the middle of the pit between two nipples; and the cauteries should be done firmly according to the previous method."
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	"And if you wish, your cautery can also be punctured with the cautery called 'puncta', whose form is described in the punctuation of ear pain."
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	"And make several punctures there, and afterwards treat that place with what you have prescribed until it is healed."
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	"Already the cautery has three branches, therefore cauterization is done with that; in one session you can perform three cauteries according to this method:"
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	"The cauterization of the little one that is the head of the helper."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	"When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery humidity and is not fixed at the time of its return, you must reduce its dislocation before it returns to its usual position. First, reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or side. Next, lift the shoulder that is located beneath the little one's neck up towards the upper parts with your left hand if the joint is dislocated below."
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And also ignite the cautery, which has two heads; this is its form:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"And then cauterize the shoulder until it enters that of the other side. Now comes the figure for cauterizing with four cautery heads."
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"and thus subtly, according to the quantity of the tent; this is its form:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"And sometimes it is adjusted in this manner, and therefore there are eight cautery heads."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"And then pause over the cautery with cotton dipped in salt, and make sure the patient is at rest, so that the limb is not moved for some time until it is consoled."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	"And if the dislocation is above and it has been done this way, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or pointed cauteries, for the joint is strengthened, moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter 26."
De cauterizacio del stomac.	"Of cautery of the stomach."
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	"When the stomach is hot and moist with many humors which that part has extracted from its complexion and multiplied, and if you continue your usual methods of treatment without considering the cause, it will happen that the patient will become worse, so extend their arms and legs, place them on a table, and cauterize this area with three cauteries: one on the lower side of the sternum about the size of a fingertip, one on each side of the sternum like the points of a triangle; take care that those which are not adjacent do not cause blisters."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	"The depth of the cautery should be equal to the thickness of two thirds of the diameter of a finger."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And if you want to use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form, this is a cautery in the shape of a circle with this form:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And the stomach is punctured with that which frightens him from this cautery: and if you see on the stomach a point according to how much you want, cauterize it with tentativeness using the cautery; and also cure it with the treatment that has been previously mentioned until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"On cauterizing a fatty liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness such that its normal complexion has been altered by superfluous egression, and if the illness is treated with what we have said and it does not improve, then you should raise the illness above its usual place and cautiously cauterize three points according to this form and quantity evenly on the liver near the hypochondrium, where a man lies on his back."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And the space between each cautery should be equal to the thickness of the finger, and the cauteries should be as long as the right hand."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"Don't press too hard with the cautery handle."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the amount of that which is adhered is equal to the thickness of a finger's joint, do not adjust it further; and if the illness is standing on the lungs; and if it is not standing, then let him be seated with his legs extended and raise his arms."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the shape of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"But be careful not to proceed too far in the cautery, and adhere the entire spinal cord so that the whole body is adhered and enters into the intestines, for here the spine is delicate. Know this."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	"On puncturing an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess or boil appears on the liver and you want to know if that boil is in the flesh of the liver or in its covering, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient feels heavy and sharp pain.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the covering of the liver, then the pain is very acute and sometimes even discourages physicians from treating it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, make the patient turn onto their back; then find the location of the boil with your touch and burn it using an iron that resembles wool, whose shape has been described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that cautery until all the chain is burned, until it reaches the nipple, until in ash it remains.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that one according to how you would treat other boils until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not use this cautery technique unless you are someone who has studied medicine extensively and has treated many illnesses. Although some people have tried it several times with success, it is still better to leave such operations to those who deserve them and know how to perform them best.
Capitol .xxix.	Capítulo XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cautery for pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	It is said by ancient authors that cautery for pleurisy should be done in this manner: take a dry and hard splinter of aristologist wood (a type of oak), make it into a sharp point as thick as your finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then immerse that splinter in oil and heat it over the fire. Then cauterize with it at a point between the continuation of the furcula and the collarbone; and with two small diagonal cauteries below the jaw on either side, inclining slightly towards the back of the neck; and with two cauteries between the fifth rib and the armpit, inclining slightly backwards; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and one on the stomach; and three cauteries on the back; and one cautery between the two shoulder blades; and two cauteries on either side of the chest.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And do not hold the cautery with your hand but place it in a suitable holder for the purpose of cauterizing.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And they also said that some people use a cautery made of iron like a rod and heated it until it glows red-hot, placing it between the shoulder blades until it reaches the boil and makes it suppurate in order to heal it, as we have mentioned for the boil on the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this operation with cautery there is danger, because many people die immediately if it happens in the location of a fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Capítulo XXX.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of cautery for the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the spleen with what we have said about division and curing, if your treatment does not succeed, then cauterize it in one of three acceptable ways:
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	"The thickness between each cautery should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of the cautery should be as we have described for the burning of the liver equally."
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	"Do not press your hand on the cauteries; let the patient lie on their side."
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	"And another method of cautery is that you should light the cauteries having two vents, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the collarbone which is situated towards the left side where the patient's chest lies."
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	"And your elevation should be such that you raise the collarbone along the length of the body, so that cauteries may be applied according to the width of the chest."
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	"And then introduce both vents promptly and simultaneously into that opening where the collarbone enters from the other side."
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	"Then extract the cautery, making four cauteries in total."
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	"If you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vents."
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	"Then remove the cautery because it has been applied for too many days, since this is more harmful than all other causes preceding in treatment."
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter LXXI.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of dropsical patients.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	"Cauterize hydrocele only, not scrotum improperly."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	"When you treat the hydrocele with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in this division and you do not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach."
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	"The depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the cord."
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	"And do not leave the cautery burning for too long, so that it grabs and stays on for a long time."
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	"And do not evacuate the patient from treatment until after the cautery has been applied, so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened with the help of healing."
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a key, according to the shape that is described above, and the one with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as it is described beforehand in its shape."
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	"Of cauterization of hair and skin."
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	"When the hair becomes infected with hydrops and is filled with yellow water, it is necessary to cauterize the hair on the back of the head, near where the ear joins the neck, raising your hand with the cautery and not turning it; and as soon as you raise your hand, do not return immediately, so that the yellow water does not ooze."
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	"The cautery should be done in this way: And afterwards make two cauteries on both sides of the skin, and each side should be cauterized with the tip of the cautery spoon."
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	"And let the cauteries be done according to the length of the skin, one near the denuded area and the other near the middle of the skin, and make two cauteries on each side."
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	"And do not leave the dressing untreated for too long so that no water oozes from it."
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	"And then treat it with those causes that we have mentioned."
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	"Regarding the cauterization of the abdominal body."
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	"When the abdominal body is affected by heat and humidity, it weakens the strength. This is the digestive and retentive virtue located in the stomach and intestines. It is treated with this method of treatment without any contradictions, sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization of virtues being exhibited, therefore cauterize it with a large cautery on its stomach as previously described for the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four subtle cauteries around the navel, using a pointed cautery; or apply cauteries to the bladder and kidneys."
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	"However, if the humidity is excessive and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize them on the pubis and intestines, placing two cauteries firmly on the stomach near the groin. This will achieve a perfect cure without error."
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter xxxiv
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	"On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids."
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When the derriere is covered in ancient eruptions or one of thick humors or corrupted humidities, and they are cured with what we have said in this division without conferring your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the left side of the lower spine and a cautery above the navel, placed like this:
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	If you find that the stomach is chilled and its food not digested, and the face becomes pale, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described; and with one cautery on the liver, and another on the spleen with a pointed cautery, leaving the cautery there for some time, and afterwards cure the inside when it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Concerning cautery after excision of tumors.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you cut arteries, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Apply the cauterizing iron to the cut artery and push it in until it reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, because if there are too many [arteries], then cauterize each one individually according to what has been said earlier, and then dress those wounds until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you use a large cautery on some [arteries], it is more likely to cause injury.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of the cauterization of fistulas made by nature in the region around the anus.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	If nature does not obey the operation recommended in its place and the patient becomes frightened by this, then it should be treated with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is some fistulous opening in the anus region and it is old, corrupted by bad humor and moisture, then it is more appropriate to probe that with a subtle tent and thus determine the quantity of its depth using the aforementioned tent.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery that resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then insert that cautery while lit into this fistula, according to how deep the tent entered it.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat applying the cautery until those corrupted tissues are completely burned once or twice or three times, according to how much it is necessary for you.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the body of the gut, then be careful about all those places. And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you think that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"And next, heal the wound within until it is healed."
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	"And if the wound is sealed and its matter has been removed, and no new signs appear for some time, then you will know that it has entirely healed."
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	"And if the matter was not all removed from it, then you will know that it is penetrating or spreading into the surrounding flesh, or corrupted due to one of those causes which we will mention later."
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterization of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When warts cause pain by friction or are very rough, and the heat of the illness is increased because of this, then you should cauterize them with a cautery iron on each wart, pressing down firmly on each one, as mentioned in the memorandum.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And if you cauterize strongly with the second one for a short while, so that three cauteries are made in a row, then apply more cauteries afterwards as needed.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter XXXVIII
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	"On cauterizing the bladder."
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	"When the bladder suffers from weakening and softening due to friction and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize this in the part where the public hair begins above the bladder, cauterizing on the right side with one cautery iron and on the left side with another."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	"And the length of each cautery iron should be according to the amount of hair in the pubic area. And cauterize this on the lower part of the back, using one cautery iron or two if necessary."
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	"And use a pointed cautery iron as needed."
Capitol .xxxix.	"Chapter XXXIX."
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	"On cauterizing the uterus."
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	"When friction and moisture occur in the uterus, causing it to be closed off from pregnancy, and its menstrual flow is corrupted, delayed, or accompanied by pain during its occurrence, then that place should be cauterized with three cautery irons around the navel area as we have described for bladder cauterization; and also cauterize on the spot where the buttocks begin on the back, using one pointed cautery iron or two if necessary."
Capitol .xl.	"Chapter XL."
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	"On cauterizing for dislocation of the urine."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	"When moist and mucous urine flows from the urinary opening, and this is the cause of its inflammation, a sign of which is that one side protrudes more than the other when compared."
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	"And the location of the dislocation can be found in the scrotum."
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	"Therefore you should cauterize the diseased area around the urinary opening with an annular cautery iron, and first mark it with your finger by tracing its circumference as it is rounded out, so that the opening falls into the middle of the circle."
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	"And the cautery previously described should be used in this form for cauterizing the stomach."
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	"And if that cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three olive-shaped cautery irons."
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And the cautery should be applied according to the amount of inflammation along the entire length of the penis; and afterwards carefully dress the wound so that it heals."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter XLI."
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	"On cauterizing the sciatic vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	"When pain occurs at the urinary opening due to friction and moisture, that condition is treated as we have described earlier but without good results, then you should evacuate the excess humors with pills made from fetid substances or artificial ones of a similar nature; and afterwards cauterize it."
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	"And there are two methods of cautery for that condition: either cauterizing with burning medications or cauterizing with fire."
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	"According to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize it around the urinary opening with three triangular cautery irons in this shape, applying them deeply."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of the finger, if using an olive-shaped or large cautery iron."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"But sometimes it is better to place the cautery in the middle above the head of the penis so that there are four cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish to do so, cauterize with the circular cautery iron described in the form used for cauterizing dislocation of the penis, ensuring that it encircles and burns off all the inflammation along its length."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when the pain is attached to the penis and not extended throughout the whole area."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"But if it extends throughout the area, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where you feel the pain, and one cautery on the knee joint a little below the right side of the kneecap."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if using the knife-shaped cautery iron, its depth should be determined according to the amount of inflammation along the penis."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if you feel that the pain extends to the area around these three points, then cauterize there with a cautery iron having three or four or more points according as it is needed."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if you feel pain below the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife-shaped cautery iron."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And be careful in all cauteries that you do not burn any large nerve or artery with the cautery iron, lest you harm the patient or cause a contraction."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"And I have seen some of those who have cauterized on the knee joint and burned too deeply in doing so, causing the thigh to become swollen, with a tumor reaching the foot, and resulting in gangrene and corruption of the entire limb."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And accordingly, a strong solution of vinegar should be applied locally, and if necessary, used as a drink to prevent death."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"And if the pain is in two places at once, cauterize each according to this method."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"And some authorities on cauterizing the penis describe the following method: Make it resemble an iron hoop, with its circumference about the size of a man's palm; and let its opening be on its convex side, according to the thickness of a date bone or somewhat less."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And within that circle there should be another third one; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a finger joint; and these circles should have two openings on opposite sides; and their length should be about one or two finger joints, with the edges well sharpened with iron in the form shown below:"
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	"And appropriate it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and throws off sparks, then place it on the urinary opening with the diseased side towards you."
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	"And then cauterize it with three applications of the hot iron at once."
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And afterward leave it alone for three days, then apply a plaster with honey and let the wound remain open too long, and cure it with ointments until it is healed."
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	"Albucasis says: 'O son, we have used this kind of cautery little because of the fear of injury to it, and therefore few are those who regard it.'"
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	"But among good cauteries there is one that suffers most, yet finds its proper place."
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	"But cautery with adherent medicines is done by making two circles having an opening bored in each, through which you insert the blade of a knife made of iron; let their length be about the thickness of two fingers or somewhat less."
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	"And if the space between each is equal to the thickness of a finger, and they are open below and above, let them contain within themselves according to this form:"
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	"And appropriate it should be placed on the urinary opening with the diseased part lying upon your left side, and press your hand over the urinary opening; then take some boiling water and pour it between two circles, letting its heat be gradually increased by the fire until it becomes as hot as possible, keeping it so for about an hour while enduring the biting and adhering of the iron — for that will bite like fire — until the biting ceases."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	"And then raise your hand along with the instrument, and wash off all the boiling water from the penis with fresh water."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	"And then leave it for three days, and apply honey plaster over it until the blackness of adhesion disappears, leaving it thus for some days until suppuration begins; this is the last stage in treatment."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And finally cure it with ointments until it is healed."
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	"If the pain extends into the scrotum or thigh, make a similar cautery on those parts containing water as was done for the penis."
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	"And this is the manner of boiling water, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medicines."
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Guessed translation: Take equal parts of alkali and unquenched lime, grind them together into a paste, sieve it through a new earthenware pot that has been pierced with a small hole on one side according to the amount needed for the mixture.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Guessed translation: Then place the bottom of one earthenware pot over another inverted one, and pour onto it a solution of water and quicklime, catching it with your fingertips. Once you have collected enough, press it gently but firmly with your fist, ensuring that no sharp water escapes from between the two pots.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	Guessed translation: Next, gather all that water and pour it onto more fresh slaked lime and alkali, as at this point the solution will be very caustic. This mixture is used in many medical operations and for cautery of other limbs, as it has fire-like properties.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Guessed translation: And among these remedies is one used for cauterization of large wounds, such as pitch, honey, and soap mixed with slaked lime.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Guessed translation: And Galen recounts an operation and cure for the pain of arthritis and sciatica, greatly praising it and saying that no other treatment is necessary. For he was cured in a single application, as he himself reports, because he bathed in this mixture and became free of that affliction.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	Guessed translation: And it is said that green celery should be taken, and if none is available, then fresh figs should be used. These should be finely chopped with a little salt and placed on the water where there is pain, or on the thing itself, or in a vessel, and bound up.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Guessed translation: And it should be left for three hours or for as long as the patient feels relief from the adhesion.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Guessed translation: And then put that [mixture] on a bath and once the body is warmed up, rub it into the skin. For the pain will cease and it will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Guessed translation: And know that these remedies should not be used for cautery, but rather for evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	Guessed translation: But Dioscorides says that when the streaked vein is cauterized with goat's beard, it is beneficial to apply this [mixture]; and the cautery should be done in this manner: wool should be dipped in old oil and placed between the thumb and forefinger.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Guessed translation: And then take dry goat's beard, inflame it with fire until it becomes carbonized. Then place it on the wool and apply it while it is still hot.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Guessed translation: And repeat this [procedure], not ceasing until the sensation of biting pain has penetrated into the water and the pain has subsided.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	Guessed translation: And this manner of cautery is called cautery with bellows.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter XLII
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterizing pain in the teeth.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some pains in the back arise from several causes, such as from cold or from a blow or from excessive evacuation, and from similar causes due to the infusion of moist and warm matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	Cautery is only used in this one condition which occurs due to an effusion of hot matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the pain with pills made of dried figs and similar ones. These should be placed on the back where there is pain in three lines according to its length, because as many cauteries as there are fingers should be done in each line, depending on the amount of tolerance for the pain and the strength of it.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a triangular cautery in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	De ventositat de la cossella e de lo cor.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Cauterization at the beginning of swelling.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease is seen in young children, and one of the signs that indicates its beginning in children is when it occurs above their anus, accompanied by swelling and redness.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And if it appears on the last vertebra of the back or neck, and begins to rise above the other vertebrae
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore, when you see this [swelling], in order to prevent it from spreading further, cauterize around it with a hot iron that is circular in shape
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery covers the entire inflamed part of the spine.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a cautery rod two or three lines thick
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	So that the points are close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And afterwards, treat the affected area with what has been said [about cauterization].
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be sure not to administer cautery to swelling that is caused by spasm of nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of the cauterization of podagra and pain in joints.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that have infiltrated each member of the body, thus when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout properly.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout caused by cold humors cannot be cured and the pains are not removed, cautery is resorted to.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	You cauterize that area appropriately with several cauteries in the circuit of the ankle joint using moxa cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of olive oil cautery:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	If it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	If pains push inside the joints or other connections, and this happens often, then cauterize each painful point with three cauteries or four in total using this olive-oil cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	If more cauteries are needed than these, then cauterie each one and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, only enough to heat the surface of the skin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	If pains push inside both knees, then administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	If pains are only on one side and are called cramps, then prick around the belly button in this way: prick along these two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	If pains remain on them, then prick around the belly button above each knot and also on the palm of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	If pains push near the joints or muscles of the thighs, then cauterize each of all the helpers (i.e., the points around the knee).
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Do not rely solely on this cautery to treat illness without good regimen and receipt of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and the disease is evacuated with this cautery alone, God willing, it will heal.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLVI
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	**On Cauterization of Fractures**
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When rupture occurs in the groin and intestines protrude before the hernia, and this is how it begins, then you should order the patient to abstain from his usual diet on that day and to use gentle laxatives so that the protruding opening of his belly may subside.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	Then approach the patient between your thighs and press firmly on their buttocks, commanding them to hold their breath until the tumor or protruding intestines appear clearly.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	Then return with your hands and press the rupture onto the bone of the pelvis, indicating the extremity that is like half a circle among the upper ribs.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the cautery in this form:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes very red and sparks are emitted.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then reduce the intestines or tumor to its natural position, and press your hand firmly over the spot so that the intestines do not escape.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And you have now put your hands between the patient's thighs and allowed him to rest on one elbow, and others support his shoulders and hips, while he holds his own buttocks with his hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	Then place the cautery on that spot with your left hand holding the cautery, and press firmly until you reach the bone of the pelvis in the middle of the thigh; repeat this procedure with another burn if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Be sure to observe carefully the condition of the intestines during your cautery, and do not burn them accidentally lest the patient suffer death or some other great harm.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	Know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, you have not completed your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery used for children be small according to their size and proportion.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then cleanse the spot of the cautery for three days with warm water so that the scar may heal properly.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then dress him with other remedies until he is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on his back for forty days so that the wound may be sealed and healed properly.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is necessary that the patient's diet be regulated according to the length of time for his healing, so that his belly may not be disturbed by excessive effort during recovery and intestines do not protrude.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when he wants to get up after forty days, gradually administer solid food, and keep him in bed for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And he should refrain from work, overindulgence in food and drink, and violent coughing or vomiting, for if he uses this regimen of healing entirely as prescribed, he will be completely healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I have given you the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and if it is at the beginning and does not proceed, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let the water that has been expelled from the intestine be as large as the third part of it; then dress him with what I have said, but do not use this remedy.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And some authors have previously stated that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in the shape of an inverted triangle, as indicated by this diagram:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"And a line is placed that goes along the latitude in the side where the rupture occurs, and another line above it; then place your hand on a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
Capitol .xlvi.	Here's the translation of "Capitol XLVI":
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"For cauterization of a twisted [organ]."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	"When pain occurs in certain members due to contusion or percussion and persists for a long time without improvement despite treatment with medicine, it is necessary to cauterize using a pointed cautery."
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	"And the cautery should be chosen according to the magnitude and smallness of the member, its strength and weakness, the location of the twist and the pain."
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	"If the first cautery does not heal it, then repeat the cautery; for such pains are often caused by a member adjacent to it being punctured, so that one should continue with cauteries until the ailment is healed."
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter XLVI."
De cauterizacio de lepra.	"For cauterization of leprosy."
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	"Some cases of leprosy are sometimes cauterized with little benefit, and especially if the type of leprosy is made by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy."
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	"And therefore, when you wish to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is dry and hardened as described in our division above. Do not give it, nor is it, if it has already begun to corrupt the whole body and all its completeness. Therefore, cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another a little further from it towards the forehead; at both horns; and one behind on the nape or neck."
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	"Lastly, press the cautery a little deeper until it impresses on the bone with a small impression, and thus loosen the scales so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated from him. And cauterize the chest according to what is necessary."
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	"And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you should cauterize him with those cauteries which we have mentioned above in the head; and cauterize also on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on the two shoulder blades, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one over the spine near the buttocks, and one on the buttock itself, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the toes and one on each toe, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his feet. And cauterize him on all the joints of these members and feet, and on each heel of his feet."
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	"And beware of burning the nerves which are over the heel lest thou burn them."
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	"Sometimes it is necessary to cauterize with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone, and another over the mouth of the stomach, and yet another over the liver."
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	"And know that the more closely you apply the cauteries, the greater is the benefit and the more helpful it is. And know that the person does not feel pain from the cautery as others do, because his body has become numb."
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	"And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as prescribed by the species of instruments used."
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Next, care for the cautery with bran meal mixed with honey, and with other remedies until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	Capítulo XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Chapter XLVIII. On cauterization for numbness
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	"When any member is paralyzed or numbed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but is not healed, then you should cauterize that paralyzed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness."
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	"And let your cautery enter the thickness of the skin a little."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	"Sometimes some numbness which affects the hands and feet, and the spine of the back and elsewhere is cauterized, and by removing the impediment of the nerves which cause that member, the numbness is removed."
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	"But do not presume to do this except one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves throughout the whole body."
Capitol .xlix.	Capítulo XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Chapter XLIX. On cauterization for moles that are raised
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	"When moles are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize over that with a preheated cautery a little according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin until its whiteness and color are removed and its color is changed."
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	"Then treat it with bran meal and lentil flour mixed with rose oil and with leaves of arnagosa, and with dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one part and mixing them all together, and then wrap it with a cloth and place it on the spot until it is healed."
Capitol .l.	Capítulo L. De cauterizacio de cecas e catarros que son en les oeus.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	"Regarding cauterization of cancer."
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	"If cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize the affected area with a round cautery tool in a circular motion around its perimeter."
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	"And the learned say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the wound; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it might ulcerate, and I have seen this happen on several occasions."
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	"And it is then more appropriate to cauterize the perimeter with circles as we have said before, or with many cauteries."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter fifty-two."
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	"Regarding the cauterization of hemorrhoids."
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	"When some hemorrhoids are delayed in maturation, and this is due to the superfluity causing them or the state of the illness, because it is old and decrepit with little blood or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of hemorrhoids; then cauterize around them with many small puncturing cauteries; and leave those alone that have already matured."
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	"But if you want the perforation to be made with a cautery, then heat that cautery of which this is the shape: and pause it in the middle of the hemorrhoid until it penetrates the cord."
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you heat that cautery on that spot which is a little higher up, so that the vein of the arm may be relieved; and then dress it until it heals."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter fifty-three."
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	"Regarding the cauterization of eroding wounds."
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Erosion is wandering corruption in the member, which erodes it just as dry wood is consumed by fire."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	"Therefore, if that erosion is in a place where it suffers cautery with fire, then heat small and large cautery nails according to what is convenient for that place where there is erosion."
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	"And then cauterize it throughout its entire extent until you have eradicated all the corrosion and nothing of it remains."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	"And then leave it alone for three days, and apply over the cauterized places a plaster mixed with oil until all the scabs are eradicated and all the corruption."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	"And then dress it with flesh-producing ointment."
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	"But if three days after that wound has healed with flesh without corruption, good. But if not, then repeat the cautery over what remains in the corrupted places."
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	"And erosion is sometimes treated with an acute medicine because it takes the place of cautery."
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	"But however, cautery with fire is easier to judge well."
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	"And I have already spoken about the treatment of it with an acute medicine in its division, and therefore take that when you begin with it."
Capitol .liii.	"Chapter fifty-four."
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	"Regarding the cautery of warts and similar conditions."
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	"Many times warts develop in the skin of the sick person that is called a 'claw,' which is a thick, penetrating cause that harms the skin. And there are two ways to cauterize them: with fire and with boiling water."
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	"But cautery with fire is done by heating the cautery cone-shaped like aulture's feather, which should be made of iron according to the size that corresponds to the wart throughout its entire extent, and it should be made of fine margins."
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	"And then pause that heated cautery on the wart, and then revolve your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the wart until it penetrates to the depth of the wart."
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	"Leave it alone for three days until it begins to suppurate."
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	"And then plaster that with wild mallows mixed with salt and leave the plaster on it for one night because it will eradicate its roots."
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress the place with flesh-producing ointment until it is healed."
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	"And if it is not converted, and many times this happens on the surface of the body, more often in the breasts and thighs, then you must administer cautery with water there, which is done by taking a quill of bronze or iron orulture's feather and pausing that on the wart. And then pour some boiling water into the quill and keep your hand still, and revolve it with pressure from your whole hand so that the margin of the quill is pressed against the root of the wart, and allow the boiling water to pass through the front of the root of the wart. And wait for the sickness a little while for the biting of the boiling water for one hour, and then remove it because the wart with its roots will be eradicated."
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	"And do this to those and also do the other thing until you come upon all of those that are on their body."
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	"And then dress them afterwards, once the roots of the warts have been eradicated, with those ointments that cause flesh to grow."
Capitol .liiii.	"Chapter fifty-five."
De cauterizacio de tremor.	"Regarding cautery for trembling (tremor)."
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	"When trembling occurs due to heat in the nerve or from a fever caused by heat, or from another similar cause, then you must cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and also cauterize the sole of its foot and on its stomach with an olive-sized cautery."
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	"And trembling will subside and recovery from the feverish illness will be hastened."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter fifty-six."
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	"Regarding cautery for accidental blotches on the skin."
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	"When blotches appear on the skin, and they are pustules filled with thick corrupted matter, then at the beginning when it appears, it should be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with a myrtle wood tip that has been extended with fire; or with long roasting tongs; or with a lenticular cautery."
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	"And sometimes it is cauterized with a similar method at the beginning of its expulsion; and they are not believed, and the superficiality is disrupted doing this, and they heal from them."
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	"But nevertheless it should be done especially after evacuation with phlebotomy."
Capitol lvi.	"Chapter fifty-seven."
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	"Regarding cautery for accidental flows of blood by means of arterial incision."
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	"Many times there are flows of arterial blood that are cut off by the plague that happens there, or by incision of ulcers or cauteries of the member, and then similar ones appear, which are difficult to stop."
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	"Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you must quickly press with your hand over the orifice of the artery and pause there with your little finger and squeeze that flow until the flow of blood from under your little finger is stopped so that it does not ooze."
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	"And then pause in the fire some small and large olive-sized cauteries for many more, and blow on them until they are very hot."
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	"And then take one of those small or large ones according to the place and size where the artery has been broken, and quickly press that cautery onto that vein once you have removed your little finger, so that it is applied and restricts that blood flow."
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	"And if blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your little finger and press the cautery, then take another cautery quickly from those that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease doing this until the blood flow has been restricted."
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	"And be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, because it may come upon another mischief."
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	"And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to restrict it in those except by one of four methods: either with cautery as mentioned earlier, or with extraction when it is not extracted because when it is extracted the ends of the muscle are burned and the blood flow is restricted, or it should be tied with felt or linen with strong tension, or paused upon medicines whose virtue is to restrict blood flow; and they should be strained with a poultice with moderate pressure."
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	"He who administers restriction to him with lamentation and with binding, and with cloth or by position of causes burning and similar, does not confirm but prepares."
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	"If indeed he does this without the presence of any other person and without medicine, let him then work with caution on the said vein above its opening as we have said, and consider how great is the contraction within that the blood is retained from the superior part of the ulcer; and over the artery let nothing be removed; and over the artery let water cold enough to coagulate the blood be sprinkled so that it may congeal and thicken; and let him afterwards see whether cautery or medicine is necessary."
Comensa la segonda partida.	"The second part begins."
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	"Regarding incisions and piercings, suction cups, phlebotomy, ulcers, and similar afflictions."
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	"This is the speech of Avicenna."
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	"We have spoken in the first chapter about every illness in which a cautery with fire is appropriate and with medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those with the forms of cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters from the head to the feet."
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	"And you shall proceed in this chapter with that same method, so as to relieve the one who desires it immediately about what they have asked."
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	"And before you begin this, know that in this chapter is included what is in the first chapter about cautery."
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	"And for that reason, great caution is necessary in the operation which is in this chapter, because many times an evacuation occurs with blood, with which life departs, due to the aspiration of the vein or incision over the abscess or opening of fistulas or purification of gangrene or extraction of arrows or incision of stones and their likeness."
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	"And from all those, fear and trembling accompanies, and in the most of them death often occurs."
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	"And I advise you not to fall into that which is in danger, because sometimes it happens that you are handled by people with many ways of causing illnesses."
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	"And some of them become angry with their illness and are light about death, and this is because of the severity of what they find in their illness, and the duration of it, and fear for the illness which signifies death."
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	"And there are those who give you their wealth and promises, you expecting them with health, but their illness is harmful."
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	"And therefore do not consent to that person who comes to you with this manner, and let your caution be greater than greed, and let your appetite not presume any cause without proper certain knowledge which verifies it, and for which there is commendable success."
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	"And use in the cure of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that to which health is converted, because in that there is help for you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory."
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	"O, children, God breathes His understanding upon you and does not take away direction and protection from you, because that is in His hand."
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	"And I have ordered this chapter distinctly into chapters according to what has been written in the chapter on cautery, concerning the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you to find what you seek and of which you have need."
Capitol primier.	"Chapter one."
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	"Of the cure of water which is contained in the head of children."
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	You know that this disease often happens in children during childbirth, and when the midwife pulls out the head of the child without its life.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it also happens for unknown reasons which are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But you did not see this disease except in children; and of all those whom you saw, they were taken by death, and thus it seems to me that it is a very sad sight.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And you have seen that the head of one child was so full of water that it could not cease to swell because of the greatness of its head, and more that the moisture increased until it died.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this moisture is either gathered between the neck and the skull, or it is gathered behind the skull on top of the brain.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For the operation in that case if the moisture is between the neck and the skull and the abscess is small, it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a scalpel in the width, and let its length be two fingers so that the moisture may flow out, and this is the form of the opening:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"And if moisture increases greatly and the boil becomes larger, then two incisions are made in this manner:"
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	"And if moisture is decreased, this indicates that the patient's commissures are fully opened and water cannot be squeezed out when you press on them with your thumb inside the mouth and it does not accumulate."
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"Now you must make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"And drain out all the moisture near the incision;
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	This is another method of incision, where you consider the size of the abscess and collection of water. Sometimes it is greater in the occiput or in front of the partition, or on the right side or left side; thus proceed with the incision where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water is evident, and then do as much as possible for yourself.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you should not cut into the artery nor cause bleeding. Keep the disease from worsening through this flow of blood, with evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Concerning the incision of arteries close to the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there occurs some cataract or wound in the eye or foot, and it becomes chronic and does not respond to medication treatment, then the last resort is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore when you want to incise those arteries where the disease reaches its head, and close by rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, then press the neck of the disease with some cloth; and consider where the vein is located. And the places where each artery pulsates are hidden unless they appear in certain men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then place your index finger on the artery and incise each one with the sharp point of each scalpel entering into the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the scalpel between the artery and cut it crosswise at its divisions above mentioned.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut open blood gushes out with pulsating exit, which flows forth frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear to your sight, then you should measure from the ear the quantity of space equal to three fingers' width, place your index finger on it, and make the incision into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And know that the amount of blood to be let is about one vein's worth. A robust man lets more or less than this amount, and all depends on the quantity which appears of the strength of the disease and the fullness of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And also consider the plague, for if some cause of headache remains on the bone, then incise there to prevent an aposteme from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And also strengthen the wound with lint and cloth strips, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the Extraction of Arteries Which Are in the Temples
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there occurs an ancient migraine or sharp headache due to moist humors and bad qualities in the temples' nerves, or if it is ancient and vehement and seems like these, and it is treated with medicinal remedies but does not improve, then we have found useful in such diseases extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of the operation and extraction of these is that the patient shaves the hair which is on the temples; and understand where the artery appears in the temple, for it will be shown to you by its pulsation, and is hidden unless in a few men due to great friction.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then let the patient's head be strengthened with some cloth; and also rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take the scalpel of which this is the shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then carefully cut along the artery with it until you reach the artery; and also cut onto it and extract that from above until you extract it from the artery and discover those tunics which are beside it, on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is small, then wrap that end of the needle around it, and cut a lengthwise slit in it according to how much its ends are stretched out and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for otherwise it would not rise up at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate three or four veins' worth of blood from it.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong double thread of cotton or long strings, so that it does not suffer putrefaction before the wound is consolidated and there is no flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the excess which is between two ligatures; and do this at that time or some other time.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery at the bone or with a needle cautery until its ends are incised, and this will be in place of that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to do this if the patient has a fever or is of warm complexion; for cautery is among those causes which help fine humors, and therefore it is better in such cases.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And also after the extraction of the arteries, you should cover the place with cotton wool, well-powdered; and then it should be cured with dry medications which cause flesh to grow, and with bandages until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if during the operation there occurs a flow of blood from the artery again, then stop that blood either with a cautery or by covering the place with cotton wool and pressing your hand until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present to you, then press your finger on the place until the bleeding stops, and bore the place with water of great coldness until the sharpness subsides, and strengthen it as is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is easiest in extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, for after you have indicated both places with a tent, and then ignited each one separately, they will reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between its ends may be elongated, for it will not be completely consolidated by this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of both points be equal.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if they are not too sharp then two points are better; for if they are very sharp they come together closely with each other, and thus do not incise the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore because there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained within them and the flesh is incised gently.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	This work is best among all works and very light.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Between two ribs, the space should be as thick as a finger.
Capitol quart.	The fourth chapter
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the treatment of acute and chronic eye inflammation
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acid tears, it is the course of those veins that are above the head's test that are affected, and no medical cause for its cure is found, sometimes the patient's face becomes reddened and they feel ants crawling on their forehead, and their eyes become weakened, humid enough so that their eyelashes are stuck together, and the skin around them is scratched by the sharpness of the tears. The ancient remedy for this condition is as follows, but do not use it alone.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	"It is commanded that the patient remove the hairs which are on their forehead, and then three incisions should be made in the forehead equally distant according to its length."
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	"And if the length of the incision is too short: one incision should be equidistant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little below the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side."
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	"And be careful not to injure the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jawbones."
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if the space of each incision is three finger widths wide."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	"If you have a dry sponge or piece of cloth soaked in warm water to dry the blood."
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	"And precisely now insert the scissors with two sharp points into it; this is its cutting form:"
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	"which is from the temple part between the second incision."
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	"Excorciate with it all the skin that is between two incisions above the hip bone, and then do this from the middle incision up to the second incision."
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	"And now place this scissor inside and insert another tool called a 'cutellar' into the first incision; it is sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	"And pause the sharp edge of that against the attached flesh near the skin, and place it inside the bone cavity, and use it to reach the middle furrow, cutting off all the vessels descending from the head to the heels with it."
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	"However, make sure that the incision continues until it reaches the skin, and then do this in the middle furrow up to the other furrow."
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	"And once enough blood has flowed out, squeeze the places where the clots of blood have formed together."
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then pause in each furrow where the old skin is, and place on it powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, making sure not to cause a burn wound."
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	"And on the third day, remove the sutures and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then cure it with basilicon salve mixed with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds heal well."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter 5."
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	"Regarding the treatment of lacerations by cauterization and the heels descending from the parts inside the head."
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	"When there is continuous cauterization with sharp and spreading veins, and the eyes of the sick person are inflamed and reddened, and their function is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hair falls out, and there is acute painful sensation in the forehead with subsequent severe headache, you should know that these materials and cauterizations come from tiny veins originating inside."
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	"And the best treatment for this is to have the patient shave their forehead, and then make an incision in it at the middle point of the forehead, a little one across its width (starting from the left temple reaching the right temple; and the incision should be between the bone; and remove your hand from the ligaments of the temples which are attached near the jaw), until the bone is exposed."
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	"Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the incision with boiled wax or hot cloth."
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then place powder mixed with wine and oil on top to prevent burning wound formation."
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	"And when you remove that and see that the burn wound has diminished, then you should scrape the bone where it begins to have flesh, and then treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh dry out, like this: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an plaster from them and apply it to these wounds so that the flesh grows fresh again."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter 6."
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	"Regarding the treatment of what happens in the ears."
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	"There are four kinds of causes that can happen in the ears: either it is mineral or similar to stone, like iron and copper; or it is from a plant, like chickpeas or broad beans; or it is caused by liquid, like water and vinegar and their similars; or some kind of animal."
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	"And therefore when a stone or other similar cause falls into the ear and does not fit nor cross inside it, place the ear in the sun, and if the stone is visible, then distill onto that some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with condition, and plug the nostrils during the arrival of sneezing."
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	"And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and stretch the ear upwards at its parts, because many times it happens that these causes are forgotten with these treatments."
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if it is not removed, then administer extraction of it with the instrument called the 'subtle epicicarious gesture', whose shape is as follows:"
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	"And if it cannot be removed with the gesture, then it is good; and if not, then administer extraction of it with a subtle hook made of little doubling."
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	"And if it cannot be removed by that, then make a cannula of brass and insert the tip of the cannula into the opening of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula enters."
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	"And then extract it with a strong attraction using the narrow wind, because many times with this what we have described happens."
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	"But if it cannot be removed in this manner, then take some heated salt or sometimes prepared with which chickens are seized by the foot in a moderate amount, and place that on the tip of the ear, and then wrap over that carefully placed."
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	"And then insert that into the opening of the ear with ease, and then dry out the ear from its moisture."
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	"And therefore if it cannot be removed with all the causes which we have described, then cut into that before it becomes a burn wound or spasm."
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	"The manner of cutting that is: first sanctify the illness of the vein called the 'sephasic' and extract its blood according to the manner of its virtue, and then press that between your palms and turn the ear upwards at its parts, and end with a small incision in the root of the ear where it has been pressed."
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And let the incision be moon-shaped so that it reaches to the stone, and once the stone is captured, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; and then sew up the incision at that time with speed, and treat it until it is healed."
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cause that falls into the ear is one of those fats which cross and swell up, then administer treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your efforts, then take a fine subtle spatula according to this shape:"
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	"and use that for the excision of that fat which has fallen into the ear."
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	"Do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place some pieces around it, and then extract those with hooks or with subtle gestures, or with incision as we have said, because extraction of it is eased."
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	"But when water enters the ear, the illness should use sneezing with condition at the beginning, and fill its ear with some warm cotton, and press over that ear in which there is water, and if it cannot be removed by this, then take many small stones and lions according to the length of the finger, heat those on the fire a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the opening of his ear and sit on one side of that part and strike with another stone over the stone which is inside the ear."
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	"Therefore do not cease this until all the water has been removed."
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	"And if the water is not removed in this way, then take some paper or cotton, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until most of it has been burned."
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	"Next, take another vessel and perform this procedure so many times that all the water is removed. Then, straiten it with a cannula as previously mentioned regarding stone extraction."
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	"If a small animal enters that ear, press it down gently and remove it similarly. If it's a large one causing pain in the head, administer the extraction with gestures and ointment, making sure to remove all of it; its removal will be easier than removing any other cause present in the ear."
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	"If, when treating an ear worm as previously mentioned in this division and the treatise on distillations, you find that your treatment is ineffective, then you should examine the ear in sunlight."
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if you find any cause of worms here, then remove them with gestures or subtle ointments. But if you find no cause, then take a cannula that is narrow at one end and wider at the other, shaped like this:"
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	"Its introduction of the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with it strongly, doing this many times until all the worms are expelled."
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	"If you do not comply with the aforementioned prescription, then fill and seal the opening of the cannula with wax as mentioned earlier. Then administer distillations which have already been used in the past for treating worms, which you can find in the treatise on distillations."
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And this is the shape of the instrument with which to pour medicinal oils into the ear:"
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	"And it should be made of silver or brass, slender, with a small hole at one end and flat on top."
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	"So that it fits tightly into the concavity of the cannula as needed."
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	"And if you wish, take the wand and wrap it decently around the end of it. Then pour oil into the concavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you choose into the cannula — with that being in the ear — then insert the wand gently on top and squeeze it with gentle pressure until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the disease feels the oil inside."
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	"And whatever is poured into the ear should be heated gently over fire."
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	"And make sure that the cause which you are distilling into the ear is not too hot, for medicines for the ear cannot tolerate this."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	"On the treatment of earache."
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children sometimes exit from the wombs of their mothers unperforated, and this has happened to some men, deafness in the ear due to plague or meat not cooked well at that time; and this deafness sometimes occurs in the front of the Eustachian tube of the ear which does not consent hearing, and sometimes it is in the parts outside.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	This one that happens at the front of him, which does not comprehend hearing, is in the most serious conditions for difficult recovery.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one where it succeeds to hear, you should put your ear near the patient's mouth and listen carefully.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then if there is obvious deafness, open that with a probe of subtle spatula whose shape it has.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the tip of it where it should be inserted is small, one part being sharp and the other blunt, then the probe should be doubled on two sides so that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And then if the deafness is due to flesh grown in the ear or in its membrane, immediately use those with fine forceps and cut that violently obstructing part inside where all the flesh has remained.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if deafness is at the front of the ear, then take a fine wire and heat it gently on fire, and carefully put it in the membrane of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And then if you have felt great deafness with what the patient feels easily, due to heaviness of hearing, relieve that pressure gently without hurting the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then put a bandage around the ear according to its size of circumference that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound. Or else take wax and pour it into boiling water, grind it thoroughly and use it, and if sometimes the ear is already inflamed then you should remove that wax and replace it with other wax that you have prepared with rose oil until the inflammation ceases; and then cure it until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and apply it to the ear, and use other treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the cure for inflammation that occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	"Dry out the moisture that occasionally appears on the eyelids of the eyes; sometimes they are dry."
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore you must have those tweezers or pincers ready, and quickly spread the edges of the wound apart, and then carefully pause over the locations described.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain comes with bleeding, you should cauterize it immediately with a fine-pointed cautery needle.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is near the incisions and wounds that return when there remains some cause of their occurrence. When they are cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Sometimes it happens that in the eyelids of the eyes there appears some cause which resembles swelling in its hardness and toughness, and for this reason it is called swelling.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the lower eyelid above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, their operation is to examine whether the size of it appears from beneath the eyelid and is enlarged in all parts. The cause of this is lightness.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore make an incision over that with a scalpel for the width, and promptly examine it throughout its extent with ease so that it may be evacuated, then suspend it with hooks and cut it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if the incision is not well-made, then only penetrate the eyelid with an incision little by little, otherwise there will be no cause for concern.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then adjust it with a suture; and care for it until it has healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	But if it is small, do not worry about that because the ointment of it restores it and covers it over.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the size is decreasing within the partitions inside the eyelid, then you must evacuate the eyelid and suspend the size with hooks, another one that you will need for incision, and press it throughout its extent, and if the eyelid through incision has extended, do not worry about anything.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And moreover concerning the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the place with something that covers it within until it has healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Concerning the treatment of a boil on the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A boil is a growth that arises in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it commonly occurs in children. It aggravates wounds of those who suffer from them and affects their sight much; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears flow from their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	"You therefore have them lie on their backs all the time, and even during sleep; and if you see moisture on their eyelids, which have already been covered by swelling, then encroachment of inflammation is apparent in the eye. And when you press that area with your fingers, you feel pulsation within it."
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	"There is a certain way of operating which the patient places their head on the pillow and props up drapes on both sides, and makes a circle according to the quantity that contains earthenware of all parts. Then they place that over that and press with their fingers all around so that arcernac may be aggregated in the middle of the circle. And then they finish by striking in the middle of that humidity with spatula incidentally through the latitude, and the fissure should not be greater than the fissure made in trepanation."
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	"But first of all you should cut the entire chain until you reach arcernac, for in most cases it proceeds through a fissure according to the form of grayish-white matter."
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	"Then remove that with drapes which you have wrapped between your fingers to the parts outside and roll it between your right hand and left hand until it is gone."
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	"And be sure not to adjust in the fissure lest with the spatula you reach the humor and damage that."
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	"But if your arcernac does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust in the fissure a little with ease until arcernac proceeds. And then remove it as we have said. And then soak drapes in water and wine and apply them on that place and wipe those with powders."
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	"And so some take salt and sprinkle it on the concavity of the fissure to prevent that which remains of that humor."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress that until it is healed."
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	"But if you happen to cut in the place of an aposteme cautery, then dress that with cataplasms of cedditis until it is healed."
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of methods for touching the humor.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids of the eyes are opened by adjusting the natural lashes and they are hardened, then those touch the eye and cause ways of illnesses such as constant tears and softening of eyelids and tissue which might be caused by destruction of the eye that is called tactinim of the eye, and it is cured in four methods: either by cautery with fire; or with sharp medicine according to what has been said earlier in the chapter on cautery; or it is done by incision and suturing; or by cannulae according to what I will say.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore you should first examine the head of the illness in its place; also turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, well then. And if not, insert a needle into that where there is flesh thicker than the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through that flesh above, and close to — but not on — the edge of the eyelid where the lashes grow, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then make an incision in the thicker part of the eyelid below the adjusted lashes with a spatula incidentally opening from the larger lacrimal to the smaller lacrimal; and then remove the thread and press gently on the eyelid with small powders of cotton or cloth, and then sew over the eyelid with silk, and it should be like the figure of a bay leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But nevertheless the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is varied among people, for some need that a great quantity of the eyelid should be incised according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then make an incision with the spatula over the two lines that you have sewn and begin from the larger lacrimal towards the smaller lacrimal.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is close to the natural lashes, as thick as a king's ring.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then place the onion in one of the two angles of the corner of the eye and then excoriate that entirely and then adjust the two lips with silk or thin wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make what is superfluous of the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some viscid causes, if you wish to do so, otherwise do not bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the stitches alone for three or four days, and then dress it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the plaster without stitching and dress it with something that dries and constrains, for the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the plaster and the adhesion of the lute; but stitching is better. And therefore this is what the ancients said about tactinim.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But nevertheless if there is anxiety about the illness and it has a good outcome, then fear should not be in him.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method of tactinim, which is to sew on the eyelid in the shape of a bay leaf and then lift up the eyelid with three onions separated and gathered together in this way:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, then hold the onions and whatever is not swallowed. Then take an needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure and insert the other thread near the larger lacrimal, and the second one near the smaller lacrimal, and adjust the threads between your fingers evenly, and then with those lift up your hand gently and elevate the entire corner on which is sewn as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the plaster with stitching and dress it when it has healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs over your incision or fissure, cut that abscess with a cautery and its surroundings, and dress it with egg.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it happens that the eyelid itself turns over its lashes. Therefore you should use what has been said about incision in that case; but stitching is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Tactinim with cannulae is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the figure underneath as has been said; and then by art make two cannulae or two thin rods, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the breadth of them should be less than the breadth of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at both ends where you hold the threads
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then attach each one with subtlety above what is superfluous of the eyelid of wool, and press the cannulae at both ends with great force, and leave them like that for a few days, because the corner will die and become necrotic and will fall in as you put it.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers, and dress the plaster when it has healed
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore when it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the lashes do not prick.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the shape of two cannulae which you will make like this:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And it should have the quantity of length and breadth neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of elevating pricking lashes in wool with a needle when the hair is hard
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are not natural, hard and rough and prickling the wool, therefore the operation in that case is that you take a thin needle and put it in that thread of cedar wood and lion's hair, and then adjust its ends and knot each one very subtly.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be as much as a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	"And immediately you should prepare another subtle phlebotomy instrument to use on them if you wish."
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	"And promptly cover the patient's head with a cloth, and be careful about the sun for your work to remain clear, because this is a subtle and delicate operation."
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	"And quickly insert the needle into the vein under the skin that requires bleeding and make it penetrate the eyelid promptly before pulling it out above the natural skin."
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	"And then pull out the skin and insert this into the wound, using one or two or three skins, but not more."
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	"And then remove your hand from there so that the skin may be removed with the wound in the eyelid along with the natural skin."
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	"But if it is pulled out and the skin is not removed, you will pull it out from the sides along with that instrument which you have placed there, until the eyelid is completely removed."
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	"And then dress that with the vision of wool, because at that time you will remove the instrument and the needle, and bandage carefully the wound so it may heal well, leaving the bandages on for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh."
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	"And if the skin is too short, then you will attach a long skin from those natural skins and elevate it with that one, or leave it there until it lengthens somewhat, and then you will elevate it."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII."
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	"On the treatment of eachcretation that occurs in the eyelid."
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When there is swelling in the eye socket and contraction of the eyelid when it is constricted either on the right or left side due to poor consolidation of plague or section or cautery, this is called leporina. This herniation can be natural or accidental, caused by consolidation of plague or section or cautery, or similar to those afflicted with evil.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of performing the operation is as follows: first, you should remove that consolidation and separate the eyelids. Then insert a wick of cloth into the space between them and bind it tightly so that they may heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	You should not use remedies for the eye which cause dryness and constriction. For if you do so, it will return to its previous state of herniation and never be truly healed.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use remedies which soften the eye, such as fenugreek and the decoction of rose leaves. Also use eyewash made with water in which alta has been cooked and strained, or diacilicon, which is softened with a little oil. Immerse the wick in these preparations and cure with them.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure will be to persist diligently without allowing any consolidation to form, following the method that was used at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	This operation that we have described is nothing more than a correction of herniation which does not allow the eyelids to return to their previous state.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure for herniation that occurs in the left eyelid
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This herniation which occurs in the left eyelid is called true herniation and it can be either congenital or acquired.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Acquired herniation occurs due to injury, cut, burn, or other similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The procedure for operating on acquired herniation is to take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh. Then pass it from the left lacrimal duct to the right one, ensuring that both ends of the thread are in the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	"And then stretch the skin over the parts above with forceps, hold it with forceps, and cut it with a broad scalpel."
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	"And then return the eyelid to its proper position, if possible; otherwise, take a needle and sew that one into the cut eyelid, and with it turn the eyelid back in place, closing both incisions on either side of the eyelid."
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	"And if the ends of both incisions are at two angles of the incision that you have made, let them meet and form a single angle when they come together."
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	"And this figure is called the Greek letter lambda."
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	"And then take some skin from that side of the acute angle on the left side of it, as much as necessary to close the eyelid."
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then join together the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and then dress it with whatever we have said about softening medicines and bandages until it is healed."
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	"And if there should be any discharge through the incision or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a flat incision over the skin of the eyelid as described above."
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	"And then separate with gauze between two lips as we have said."
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	"And in summary of the discourse on the treatment of inflammation when it is above or below, that which runs through the operation, according to how it has been prepared, is like this: it is variously shaped."
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	"And the skilled artisan always prepares in advance every possible means within his power to bring back the figure as close as possible to its natural form, according to what is appropriate for the operation and the instruments, especially in major procedures."
Capitol .xv.	"Chapter XV"
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	"About adhesion of the eyelid with the conjunctiva or the cornea."
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	"When this adhesion occurs in many people, so that the eyelid is stuck firmly upwards with the pus above it, and is hindered from its natural movement and functions, then you should insert the tip of a probe between the eyelid and elevate it upwards, or else extend it using a hook."
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	"And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula that is not sharp for incisions, having it obtuse at one end so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula without letting it scratch the eye with its sharpness."
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	"And your incision should be such that it easily removes that adhesion so that the eyelid may return to its natural form and all of the adhesion is healed."
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	"And then you should put into the eye saltwater with which you wash it; or else distill in it a solution of juniper dissolved in water."
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	"And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with gauze from it, and place over the eye a compress of wool infused in egg white, and then on the third day apply healing remedies so that it may be healed."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI"
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	"The cutting of a nail and the prominence of flesh around the lachrymals."
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	"Know that a nail can be in two ways: either it is nervous, and is like hard bone that is subtle; or it is non-nervous, like congealed white humidity, which when iron touches it, if it is forced to take it, it is cut off and the iron does not go into it."
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	"And both species do not begin except from the larger lacrimal, which goes little by little to cover the eye and prohibit light and its movement."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	"But the manner of operating in the cutting of it is that the patient should hold his head steady with his own hands, and he opens the eyelids of it, and lifts up the eyelid with your hand, and then carefully takes hold of the nail with a pair of forceps with little duplication, and stretches it upwards."
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	"And then take an awl and insert it into that a little bit of horse or cow or ox or similar hair, or strong silk thread, duplicate the tip of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the nail with the thread; and stretch it upwards, and strip off from the side of the nail with the hair what was covering the pupil."
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	"And thus you should follow that one with the hair behind it."
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	"And then you incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift up the skin of the natural lacrimal to ensure that by cutting it there will be no continuous flow of tears."
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And sometimes the nail with its sole extended upwards or tied as we have said, and then strip off with this spoon which is its shape:"
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	"And take care that with the spoon you do not touch the corneal tunic and that there should be a rupture in it, and that the pupil is pierced."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And then place in the wound a little bit of salted tincture or clean cheese rennet, and leave it overnight; and then cure it with water that is necessary until it heals."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	"And if the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert the needle nor can it be attached with the hook, then in many cases this type of nail is cured with medicines, and is healed as you have seen and is described in the division."
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish to incise it, then open the wound of the ailment and take a fine spoon with sharp edges shaped like this:"
am subtilitat.	"with fineness."
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	"And if sometimes that is rarefied and contracted and pressed against the root, then distill from your ear into the wound of clean cheese rennet or clean rose oil or salted tincture, and fill the wound overnight."
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat the operation over it until everything that is of it is removed, except for the contrary aposteme which should remain in the wound, because when you leave it, and cure the aposteme at the beginning so that it heals."
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if it is noticed in the wound due to great harm, should be suspended with a hook; and cut off its tip with one stroke without extending the incision lest tears flow."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"And then distill into the lacrimal clean rose oil and cheese rennet until it heals."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	"Of incision of a pimple and of what is born of skin adhered in the wound."
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	"Sometimes in the wounds of some eyes, rough skin is born which covers the pupil or comes close to it and sticks out over the eyelids, and presses them together tightly at their edges like a ballast stone."
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	"But the operation in this case is that the ailment stops the head of the thread from going out; and then open the wounds of that one and collect all that skin with appropriate hooks according to what you have, and take it with a forceps or tweezers; and then incise the skin at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, taking care not to damage the wound during your operation."
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	"And let your incision be with the one with which you cut those or with the spoon that we have described in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps with which ascites is collected according to what will come up in this chapter."
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"Therefore when your incision is completed and all that skin is removed, then fill the wound with salted tincture or distill into it rough powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and cover it from outside with egg white until it is assured against a dry aposteme."
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	"And if some cause of a pimple remains and is severely inflamed with cauterization dryness, and you fear a dry aposteme, then leave the wound and cure that aposteme with what will heal it; and then repeat the operation over it until it heals, and do likewise for adhered skin which occurs in this type of wound."
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	"But however you must avoid all cure of the wound by natural means or by chance operation with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member can withstand this operation."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter XVIII."
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	"Of collection of pus in the wound."
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"Pus is rough matter that is thickened over the wound and prevents its operation from being seen, making it difficult for many days."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	"Therefore at the beginning you must consider whether the wound in which pus is present is strong and does not have another ailment besides pus; then collect that pus."
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	"And when you command the ailment to stop its head from going out, then suspend those veins with one hook or two according to your judgment; and let that hook be of subtle duplication in this form:"
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	"or thus two hooks graduated in one body in this form:"
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"And then let those veins be collected with subtle forceps subtly and remove the blood little by little until you see that those veins are removed from the wound and turned over."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"And take care not to damage the wound with the ends of the spoon; and if your operation is done in midday before the sun, be very careful in your operation so that you do not cut anything but those veins."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"And when you have completed it, then distill into the wound chief wine or rough to help dissolve what has been removed from the pus."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if that is not possible for you to collect everything at once, then plaster it all with what relieves its pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain of it has subsided and it is assured against a dry aposteme."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And then repeat over it according to what the most expert manner requires until it heals."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"And this is the form of the forceps:"
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	"Of reduction of nasal bleeding."
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	"When you treat nasal bleeding with cautery or sharp burning medicine according to what is precedented in it and it does not heal, then do not rely on it but cut over the aposteme where it has reached maturity and extract all the moisture that is in it and the bone until it becomes visible."
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then when the bone has been discovered and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it with an instrument of which this is the form:"
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	"And it is called the sharp point and it should be made of iron, and its head should be round thus that you can grasp it like this which has been pierced by the piercing of a file or delicately by subtle piercing (as in the following form)."
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	Place that over the corrupt spot on the bone, then rotate it between your fingers and press gently until you know that corruption is scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	After doing this several times, then restore the location with drying and astringent agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the location is consolidated and has good new flesh growing, and there is no infection or suppuration, nor any signs of relapse after 40 days, then you will know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if it is not, then it should be reduced to the shape of the nose using this method: first, expose the bone with a saw or sharp medicine, and once exposed, take a chisel...
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The outer part of the chisel should be triangular, and its handle thinly tapered towards the tip.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Place the chisel on the bone near the lacrimal duct; then hold your hand a little above it and rotate the chisel with your hand until it penetrates all the way through the bone, and you feel that air can pass through when you remove your hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Then restore the area with astringent drying medicines as before.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And when the flesh has grown and the area is hardened, then the material that previously flowed out will return to the nose, which makes the condition easier to bear.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of a nasal hump
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the nose is entirely humped and there are no signs of damage or reduction, then it is necessary to relieve the condition by following these steps:
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	"The manner of powders is that you should take linen cloths cut in four folds."
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	"And then place those on top of each other according to the quantity that you may need."
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	"And then place a hard cloth with strong binding on top of them; and apply the cupping glasses with suction without scarification; and then remove the cupping glasses, leaving him/her tight for the day and night."
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	"But if during this time the binding becomes loose, it should be tightened immediately."
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	"And then remove the bandage in the morning and night as we have said."
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	"And if sometimes he/she is reduced, that's good; but if not, then apply the plaster with powders and binding and cupping glasses until healed."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter XXI"
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	"Of the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic."
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	"When there is a rupture in the uveal tunic and it protrudes from the eyelids like a grain of wheat, and you want to incise that prominence, then the operation is as follows: insert the needle into the groove of the uvea where it enters above, and also insert another needle through which a doubled thread has been passed on the side of the lacrimal duct. Make the first needle penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; then incise the location of the doubled thread and pull with that the prominence of the uvea along the circumference of the needle, and tighten it well."
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	"And then remove the needle and apply over the wound a bandage infused in egg white; leave it until the thread is absorbed with the uvea."
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then heal the wound with whatever comforts it until the inflammation has healed."
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	"And sometimes it happens that the entire prominence is gathered together with a circle of cloth around the wound; then it should be punctured with a fine spatula that comes to the front of the wound, and let the mucoid humor flow out, and lower the eyelid promptly."
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	"And then tighten until healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII"
De curacio de alconati.	"Of the treatment of ophthalmia."
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	"This condition called ophthalmia is nothing but sanies, which adheres to the eyelid like descending water, and it is not that."
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	"The manner of treating it is that you should make the person sit on an equipped and straight chair; then take their head in your hands with two fingers and press until you see the sanies coming out from the corners of the eyes. Then dry it up so that it does not descend, and cover the light, and the cause of the illness will be seen as follows:"
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	"And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water."
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	"But if the descent of the sanies is not prepared as we have said, then make the person sit between your palms and take a fine spatula and pass it over the surrounding panicle slightly beyond the continuation of the conjunctiva with the tunic of the cornea at the limbus (that is to say), until the sanies has been evacuated."
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	"Then once it has been evacuated, you should distill onto the eye cold water in which honey has been mixed or boiled water with ground fenugreek and honey."
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat them according to the other causes until healed."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII"
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	"Of the treatment of descending water from the belly."
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	"We have already spoken about the types of water in the division and which is suitable for perforating according to what we declared earlier, now that one according to health."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	"You should now make the patient lie on their back on a bed and tie their belly with a string tightly."
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	"And place your left hand near the eyelid of their left belly if the water is in the left side of the belly; or with your right hand if it is on the right side."
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	"And with your right hand take a magnet if the belly is left [sided]; or with your left hand if it is on the right side."
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	"And place the tip of the magnet near the crown of the head according to the thickness of the ray in the belly from the side of the tear duct, and quickly attract the magnet with force while turning your hand towards it."
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	"And enter into the belly through the tear duct and make sure that the magnet has reached its target."
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	"And ensure that the length of the magnet's path is equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the darkness, which is the crown of the belly; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the cornea with your vision."
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	"And then place the magnet into the location where there is water, and quickly pull it down once or twice, and if the water goes down immediately, then at that moment the patient's sight will be restored, and the magnet will remain in its belly."
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	"And then pause for a moment; if the water has gone down, then quickly pull it back again before the magnet is thrown out."
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	"And then when it has gone down and no longer descends, carefully extract the magnet, turning your hand slowly, and dissolve a little bit of clear gemstone salt in water and wash the belly inside with that; then cover the belly outside with cotton or stop it with wool infused in rose oil and album of hen's egg, and tie it with that."
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	"But those who are of our time pause over this remedy with the albumen of a hen."
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And if the magnet does not obey you when entering the belly due to its hardness — because some men have very hard bellies — then you should take the spatula which is called an albarello, the shape of which is as follows:"
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	"And then pierce with it that junction, and do not bring your hand out of the track, and if you cannot find a way to lead the magnet to its subtle place."
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	"And then introduce the magnet as we have said."
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	"And you must complete your work by having the patient lie down to sleep in a room that is dark and quiet, where he should lie on his back without moving at all."
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	"And pause for a moment to observe the nature of the water so that its nature is clarified, and do not move his head to either the right or left at all."
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	"And apply the remedy according to the patient's condition on the third day."
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	"And then remove him from that dark room and expose him to bright light, show him various things, and then return the remedy on the seventh day."
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	"And you should not do this at the time of bleeding or immediately after an infusion."
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	"Take care to keep this secret because water can easily take on great and violent properties due to its nature."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	"But if an abscess forms, then you should remove the bandage from the belly on the seventh day, and correct it with something that will draw out the abscess."
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	"And then uncover his eyes and observe his facial expression to see how well he is recovering from his illness by keeping him in the dark room for a few days."
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	"And then gradually take him out of that darkness and have him discuss various things with you."
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	"And know that in Alchemy, the disciple of vision sometimes sees certain visions, and therefore be prepared for this operation."
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	"And it has been brought to our attention that some of those who practice Alchemy have said that fire is made in the magnet, which is pierced with a tube through which water is sucked up."
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	"But we have not seen anything like this in our land nor is it written about in any of the ancient books that we know of. Therefore, this may be a novelty."
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	"And these are the forms of the species of magnet which we have mentioned above for those who do not know them:"
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	"And they are made of iron or proper steel, and their extremities are made with this triangular subtlety, the pointed extremity being like this:"
Capitol .xxiv.	"Chapter XXIV."
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	"Of the treatment of flesh torn in the nose."
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When flesh of diverse colors grows in the nose, which some say is due to a heavy scorpion or a large polyp, and this illness is called polyps because it resembles that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And its flesh is cancerous, ulcerated, dark-colored; and the flesh of the lion is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is not fraudulent nor cancerous lion flesh, you should place the sick person's hands between your breasts and put them in the sun, and cover their nose and ears with that flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And properly extract that from the external parts, and properly cut with a sharp, subtle knife what you have grasped of those parts when you know that all the flesh is removed; for if anything remains there due to some cause which makes excision possible, then quickly remove it with one of the subtle instruments with ease where nothing remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if there is an ulcer with sanguineous matter or an aposteme that is cauterized, then you should do what is necessary; but if it is of malignant ulcers, then you should cut and cauterize until the sanguineous matter is removed and all the cavities are opened.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And properly apply to the wound a dressing with wine and honey or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the wound is open and there proceeds from it humidity towards the palate, then you should know that it has already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that within it there is flesh still adhering to the overlying bones of the nostrils where excision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should insert a thread of sufficient thickness into it and twine it with numerous knots, leaving between each knot the quantity of a finger or less, and then apply it to the patient's nostril with a hook or any other means which is possible for him.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this is done, have him inhale the odor of something pleasant until it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and let him blow his nose into his garment, for many people commonly do this action in schools, and it will be easier for him who wishes to do so.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And properly tie the two extremities of the thread, one extremity which comes out over the nose and the other which remains inside the nose, and apply a suture of flesh with the knots that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is attached to the knots of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the thread and apply to the nose a bandage with honey, and do this for three days or more until the dressing has eaten away all that is left of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And finally, apply to the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you wish for a drying cure, use that one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	"And this is how the purge maker instrument works, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:"
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	"And make of silver or copper, resembling a small lantern opened like this, similarly to a small shell, with the mouth likewise."
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	"And if you wish, make a closed cannula like this, and the cannula of the purge maker instrument should be flat and open; hold it at the end with your hand when you pour oil or water into it from the succulent causes."
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	"And this purge is priced: take of each costus, white balm, ginger, saffron, long pepper, scammony, ephedra, and anise, six ounces; compound them with the juice of beetroot and leek, make pills thereof, temper one pill with warm water, and administer it to the patient lying down."
Capitol .xxv.	Here is Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	On the holes made in the outer parts of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Frequently it is necessary to make holes in the outer parts of the nose, and it is greatly praised and commended in those days when much care is taken for its regard.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of that, and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And afterwards apply a poultice or cautery or burning medicine to the place where it is located.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its incision is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it is blackish, hard, of dark color and of little sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a malignant abscess. For often that which you cut into this abscess will bring great mischief to him upon whom it was.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of light touch and not of dark color, and sometimes incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and cut into it without fear, and cure the place with that which dries and constrains until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Here is Chapter XXVI:
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity is dissolved by wound or ulcer.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when you encounter dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilage, pay little attention to this operation unless you are among certain men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when you find some cause of these, such as a fresh wound with its blood, then join the two lips of the wound with suture and apply cure until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of dissolved continuity are already separated and each is quite healthy, then you must excise each part from its visible root until there comes forth no blood.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then join the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle dragon's blood powder and some rue powder, and apply a piece of diaphoretic plaster or some other consolidating plaster upon the powder, and let it lie for two or three days. Then remove it, change the plaster, and allow the wounds to close by themselves. Afterwards cure with ointment until they are healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of suture is that you should join the dissolution of continuity with needles as we have described in the suture of the belly, or join it with a thread as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.	Here is Chapter XXVII:
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips inside
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often seen in some men inside the parts of their lips certain hard tumors resembling grains of barley, and some are smaller and others larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore you should turn back the lips and split each of those hardnesses on all sides, and afterwards perform the excision by filling up the place with saffron thoroughly ground until it is tightened, and then wash it with vinegar and dress the wound with astringent water, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Capítulo XXVIII
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of the incision of attached flesh in the gums
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Often when there is a swelling above the attached gum which the ancients called albus, then you should suspend that with a ligature or hold it with forceps and incise it along its length, and let the sanies flow out and the blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And afterwards apply saffron thoroughly ground or other astringent or excitative powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns again, incise it once more and cauterize it, because then it will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Capítulo XXIX
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"Due to iron teeth."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"If on the surface of the teeth in dental sockets and those of the foreskin, between the gums are rough, hard, sometimes blackened and are made yellow or greenish that goes through the gum for this corruption and the teeth are loose."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	"And therefore you should seize the patient between your hands and place their head on the towel, and remove those teeth in which such escarps appear and cause similar sand within them from which no cause would remain, and this is due to blackness and yellowness and other colors that are changed."
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	"So if that is what you want to achieve at the beginning of the reason, good. But if not, then repeat the reason over those on another day and the second and third until it comes to the final statement in what you want."
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	"And know that teeth require many different types of files with various shapes and figures, according to how your operation is prepared."
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	"And therefore choose the file with which the tooth is filed from the inside of the socket is different from the file with which it is filed between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of files are those that you should prepare, which you will see soon:"
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
D’eradicacio de dentz.	"Of tooth extraction."
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	"So that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and diligence in every extraction of it, for there is no cause that should hinder the view of it when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance that is exposed during the extraction of it."
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	"But when it is necessary to extract that tooth, firmly you must be certain what the painful tooth is, for many times the pain deceives and seems to be in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through the operation of barbers."
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	"So when you are certain what the painful tooth is and know it well, then it is necessary that you scarify around the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the gum of the entire socket, and then slowly with your tweezers or with subtle forceps little by little until that concavity is reached."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	"And then apply strong forceps for good grasp or sturdy pressure and place the head of the diseased tooth between your fingers that you hold it well so that it does not move, and pull the tooth straight in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the sick."
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on that side of all the parts with ease and effort, causing the removal of it as was done at the beginning."
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	"But if the tooth is loose or decayed, then it is necessary that you fill that cavity with cloth and strengthen it with the end of a thin needle so that it is not broken at the time of your traction on it with forceps."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"And it is necessary that you work carefully with scarification around the entire gum and guard well your force so that you do not break it and leave a part of it behind, and return on the diseased one for the malice that may be greater than the first pain of it."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant and arrogant barbers do in their haste and boldness over the extraction of teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great diseases which are more difficult to treat than if they had been broken, and the roots of them completely removed or some of those, or that they extract it with some bones of the jaw as we have often witnessed."
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	"And after the extraction of it, let the mouth be washed with warm wine or vinegar mixed with salt."
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	"And if there is flow of blood from it, as often happens, then sprinkle some quantity of sage and pour it on the wound, and if that sage does not suffice, cauterize."
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	"The shape of the strong and subtle forceps with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be of long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them."
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	"And let them be such that when stretched with those, they are not bent, being short at the ends."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	"And let them be made of India steel, well-made with straight extremities, and at the ends of those have teeth which fit into each other and stretch by compression descent forcefully, and sometimes the extremities of those are like the shape of a bird's beak called 'ciconia', that is to say, they are strong in constriction."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter xxxi."
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	"Of the extraction of teeth and removal of the locked jawbones."
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When tooth extraction is necessary due to some cause, then you should place your finger on the spot with pressure for one day or two until that area becomes softened; and then insert cloves or tweezers whose ends are shaped like those of a bird called the ciconia or owl, in the form of forceps.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them [the tweezers] should be made inside thus like a file or rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not succeed with this extraction using these forceps or tweezers, then you should cut around the root and strip off all the flesh and insert the instrument called "atali," which is a small lever whose shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short, thick end that is not bent back, lest it be injured.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If the root is not removed by this means, then it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	"The second tool should be triangular in shape with a very fine tip."
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	"And this is how you use this instrument, which has two branches whose shape is roughly as follows:"
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	"And with other instruments that resemble a pair of large scissors, this is their shape:"
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"of the triangular tip twisted or shortened, which should have some thickness and not be too sharp so as not to be easily bent."
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	"And you should know that instruments for extracting teeth are similar in shape to other instruments."
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	"But skilled and subtle artisans in this art find for themselves according to what they understand the operation and various diseases. For there are diseases that ancient authors did not give or appoint any specific instruments for their varied forms."
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are broken or fractured, then one should carefully operate on that area with whatever is convenient among the instruments and forceps mentioned earlier in the extraction of teeth roots, using this gesture whose shape is as follows:"
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	"And one should gently and gradually widen it with some thickness, holding or squeezing it with the mouth so that it does not escape or slip until all of the bone is removed. Then apply medicine suitable to the area."
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that part of the fracture and its darkness, and treat it until it heals."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII."
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	"Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others."
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude beyond their natural course due to form being distorted, especially in women and venerable elders; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not adjacent to another tooth, and there is no possibility of extraction or splinting, then it must be removed. But if it is attached to another tooth, then you should cut it with this instrument whose shape resembles a pig's bristle made from Indian steel with an extremely sharp tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And may your incision be such that you cut through the tooth in three days due to its hardness, without harming any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an erupted tooth exposed to attrition, then grind that one with this Indian steel file whose shape is as follows:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be made entirely of Indian steel and sharp-pointed; and let it have many fine points like those on a file used to grind the tooth little by little over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are harmed or injured.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And when you have finished lining it up, straighten it with rubbing stones.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where one portion is broken off and causes the tongue to lisp, then you should grind away that part until its sharpness is completely smoothed over and flattened out so that the tongue does not stumble nor speech become impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Concerning the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver foil.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are damaged due to concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew properly even after treatment with medicinal astringents, then you should fill those that are stricken with gold foil and not silver, because silver turns green over time and can tarnish in just a few days, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the foil be in such fineness and thinness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. And the method of placement is as follows: take the foil and fold it in half lengthwise between two healthy teeth, and then wrap it around with two twists between the damaged teeth or just one if there are fewer, until the tissue reaches the sound part of the other tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then press down firmly on that side where you began, using your hand with ease and skill so as not to damage the tooth.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your pressure be such that you secure the foil tightly between the roots of the teeth so that it does not become loose or dislodged.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then trim the excess edges of the foil with forceps or scissors, and gather them up in each place with plaster, covering them up between the sound tooth and the damaged one so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then let it remain thus for three days.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, reinforce it with more foil in this same manner whenever necessary.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the method of preparing teeth and the technique for restoring two sound teeth and two damaged ones, as shown in these illustrations:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it happens that a tooth or two are displaced by their own falling into their proper places, and have been restored as we have described, but still remain loose,
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Then only does this happen to skilled and knowledgeable artisans.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Sometimes it happens that some of the bones of cattle are apt for this purpose, and they are fashioned into the shape of teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and secured as we have described, remaining in place and serving well for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter XXXIV
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Concerning the incision of the frenulum which causes difficulty in speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This frenum, which attaches the tongue either naturally or accidentally due to scar tissue that has formed, may sometimes obstruct speech.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation is as follows: have the patient open their mouth while they are sitting upright with their head held still. Then lift up their tongue and cut that nerve frenum according to its width until the tongue is completely freed from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is hardness or firmness in that place due to scar tissue from an injury, then use tweezers and cut through it lengthwise until you have completely severed the frenum and dissolved the adhesion.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Be sure not to make a fissure in the front of the flesh, and avoid cutting too deeply or causing bleeding.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then rinse the wound with water or vinegar or warm water, and apply a bandage to the tongue. Tell the patient to keep their tongue away from that side for several days so that it does not heal again in that place.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if bleeding occurs, apply a lint bandage soaked in nitric acid to the area. If the bleeding continues, then cauterize the location with a silver nitrate cautery as appropriate for this situation.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Concerning the removal of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, a tumor resembling a small mollusk develops under the tongue and interferes with its normal function. This can grow large enough to fill the entire mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	The procedure is as follows: have the patient open their mouth facing the sun, then examine the tumor.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	If you find it to be of dark or black color, hard, and insentient to the patient, then do not touch it as it is a cancer.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	But if it is fluctuant and white, then use tweezers to compress it and cut through it with a fine scalpel, making sure to cut all the way around. If bleeding occurs during the procedure, apply a lint bandage soaked in nitric acid to restrict the flow of blood.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until you have completed it with care, rinsing the area with vinegar and salt. Then treat it with other appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	"Of removing an abscess from both ears and that which is located in the navel, as well as other abscesses."
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	"When an abscess occurs in the navel, it is called a gland that forms sometimes there. It happens externally and is named 'both ears'. If you cure it with what we have said in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and insensitive to touch; do not touch it with iron."
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	"If it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood. Rather let it ripen inside, and then you will draw it out or else it will break open by itself."
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	"If it is white in color, hard, and its root is thin, then it should be incised."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And the operation in this case is to consider first whether the abscess has already ruptured and healed completely with rest or if it has decreased somewhat. Then make the incision before sunrise, with the patient's head towards the east and their mouth open. The assistant should take a clean cloth and press the tongue of the patient gently with an instrument called the 'mouth holder,' which is shaped like this:"
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	"And it should be made of silver or brass, and it should be sharp with a knife."
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	"Then when you press the patient's tongue with that instrument and expose the abscess, cut it with your knife very gently. Then take a forceps and grasp it and put it in the wound, and pull it outwards as much as possible."
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"After that, if you pull out some of its tunics, then immediately cut them with this instrument whose shape is like this:"
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	"It resembles a forceps, but its extremities are curved so that the points of each one face towards the other, very sharp. It should be made of iron carefully engraved."
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	"But if this instrument is not available, then incise it with a scalpel whose shape is like this: It should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	"And after you have made one incision, make another according to this same manner of incision. Then wash the wound with clean water."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is bleeding from the wound, wash it with water decocted from oak bark or myrtle leaves and other astringent substances to stop the flow of blood. Then treat it until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	"And sometimes other abscesses appear near those two ears, and you should incise them according to what I have said about the incision of two equal wounds."
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	"And I already treated a woman who had an abscess that appeared on her throat, which was dark in color with little sensation. She had closed the wound herself and was breathing with great difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating or drinking water for several days. She was already near death if not treated within one or two days."
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	"And the abscess had swollen so much that it had formed two large lumps, which discharged through two holes."
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"So I opened it with forceps and gripped one of them, and pulled it out. A large portion of the abscess came out, and then I made an incision where I understood the other hole was, and I opened her mouth and pressed down her tongue, and then I put a forceps in that abscess."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And then you should cut off a large part of it, and if there is not much bleeding from it."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"Therefore the woman's throat was completely healed, and she immediately began to drink water and eat food. However, I continued to incise that abscess many times over a long period of time, and it succeeded in forming another abscess in its place, which elongated that incision."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"So I took hot water and cauterized her throat, therefore stopping the addition of new flesh. And then she walked around, and I did not know what God had done through me."
Capitol .xxxvii.	"Chapter XXXVII."
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	"When the navel becomes inflamed."
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	"When catarr descends to the navel and it becomes inflamed and elongated, at times it is called perpendicular; but if it is thick and round at its base, at times it is called 'bubble'."
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	"If the inflammation is cured with what we have said in this division and your treatment does not confirm it, and especially if an abscess has already burst open and become thin, then you should incise the one that is aggregated roundly. And if it is as long as that, and there is bleeding of dark or black color, without any sensation at all, then you should beware of this incision, for in such cases there is fear about the patient's condition."
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	"And when you find that according to the manner I have described of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient lie down and press the tongue of it with an instrument which has been prepared for that purpose, and hold the onyx in the new wound, and pull it downward and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of double mellas."
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	"And you should not incise it unless what is appropriate to its natural term without addition, for if you incise more than that, you will harm the patient."
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And after the incision, use what has been recommended in the incision of double mellas, and care for it until it is healed."
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, you should use a hot iron in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cautery in it is only with sharp water, which is that you hold the head of the patient on his right side, and then press the tongue of it with the instrument which has been mentioned, and take some of the water which has been mentioned in the chapter of cautery, and apply it with a live coal, pausing it neither thick nor thin, and from it fill the cavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:"
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	"So that the extremity of the cavity in which the medicine is placed is like the cavity of a spoon of ray, and pause the instrument with the medicine over the ulcer, and the patient should lie on his side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth does not fall into the interior of it through the intrusive medicine, lest it cause any harm to him."
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	"And then you place your hand on the medicine and squeeze it over the ulcer for about half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and dried by the biting of the medicine."
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	"And if you wish, take some cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula from above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the ulcer, and then leave it alone for it to dry and fall off after about three or four days."
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	"And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and after cauterization cleanse around the ulcer with cotton soaked in honey, and remove what is on the circuit of it from the medicine, rinse it with warm water, and then treat it externally with embrocation, and afterwards wrap it up until it has healed."
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	"And this type of treatment should be used with caution, incision and cautery should not be feared."
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	"Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cautery and incision, for it is treated by suffumigation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, scabious arabic, chamomile, broad-leaved plantain and similar herbs of that kind, and adjust all those herbs, or some of them, in a pot, and immerse them in sour wine, and boil it; and the pot should be well covered with decent lutum, and in the middle of the pot there should be a tripod on which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass."
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	"And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor can reach the uvula above it until the uvula is well suffused."
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	"And repeat this several times until it is dry, and be sure not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an eruption of abscesses, for that would stimulate the abscess too much, and you should not do that, but rather perform the treatment for the declaration of the abscess of it."
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	"But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a reed and make a closure of wax at the extremity of it, so that the mouth of the patient may be covered, for the closure of wax prevents the vapor from burning the mouth."
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	"And this treatment is good for health."
Capitol .xxxviii.	"Chapter XXXVI"
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	"Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat, and of other causes."
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	"Often adhesions are found in the groin or spine of the foot due to some other cause."
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then you must remove what is apparent of it, upon which the sight falls, because when you press with the tongue on an instrument before the sun, it will be declared to you what is in the groove.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not apparent and is hidden in the groove, you must make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach, because very easily the cause attached to the groove will be forgotten by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of bread dipped in oil or lettuce juice, or give them some dry breadcrumbs mixed with honey and salt; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, squeeze it well with wine, and have the patient swallow that, because when it gets to the place where its spines are extracted, they will be remembered then.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you take an eel and beat it well in wine, and place it within the table and suddenly extract it; or take a pot and suddenly put it in and suddenly remove it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if those causes which we have mentioned are not forgotten, then do this with a lead instrument in the following way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be thicker than a little finger, and at its end make a cavity which you will insert into the groove with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And have the patient raise their head upwards, and make sure that your touch does not reach the bone of the throat, because if it did it would go into the body and with that which removes the bone or the spine, or what the physician touches with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But nevertheless the patient should insert it themselves, by their knowledge of the place where the cause is attached and removed downwards, and they should pull their hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the amount that has been prepared before it is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	**Chapter XXXIX.**
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the Extraction of Sanguisuga Attached to the Throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When sanguisuga is applied with what we have mentioned in the division of cure with medicines and it does not adhere, consider then at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, because you have prepared the tongue of it with the instrument which we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the sanguisuga, extract it with a small hook or with a gentle subtle movement accordingly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and carefully place within the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron brand, and do this several times (until the sanguisuga is dead and removed from the throat) and have the patient abstain from water all day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vessel full of water, wet, and place the mouth of it upon that (the throat), and wash the mouth with it; and do not allow any cause to remain in it, and hold the water for an hour again with your hand, because the sanguisuga quickly feels the water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not forgotten with what we have mentioned, then fumigate the patient with incense or with asafetida through the instrument which we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that they may recover.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is another way of operation in fumigation of that: Take an earthenware pot with burning coals inside it, and cover the pot with a lid which has a hole in its center, through which insert the end of the instrument; then begin the fumigation above; place the patient's mouth on the end of the cannula, close their mouth so that the fumigation is not wasted until you know that the fumigation has reached the sanguisuga, because the sanguisuga will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times, and have the patient abstain from drinking, eat salty foods and drink water, and do not drink water; and thus it is necessary that with this regimen it should be forgotten.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which sanguisuga is extracted from the throat when it is seen: It resembles forceps thus, except that there is some curvature in it:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	"The one placed on the pestle has an extremity like the beak of a stork, which is called a glove, sharpened with a file."
Capitol .xl.	"The last chapter."
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	"In this one, the sum of the sermon regarding the opening and closing of apostemes is given."
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	"Apostemes are many species with many forms, according to what has been remembered about them, each one in this book."
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	"And thus they differ in perforation and section through two ways: one is by the means of gangrene, inserted within; and thereby we comprehend from moistures."
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	"And the second way is near the places where they occur, for gangrene occurring in the head is different from that in the buttocks; and gangrene in fatty tissue differs from that at joints; each has its own treatment through operation."
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	"And with regard to some gangrenes, it is necessary not to pierce them but rather wait for their maturation or completion of healing."
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	"And there are other gangrenes that must be pierced when they are hard and not ripe according to their completion, such as those near joints, for when gangrene comes near a joint, its nature is prolonged within what is in its circuit, and quickly the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that limb. Or it may be near a main member, and if you delay piercing until it is ripe, there will be no harm to the main member. Or it may be near the anus, which should not be pierced unless it is hard and unripe, so that its opening does not extend into the inner parts of the anus and make a fistula."
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	"But you must know the time for piercing gangrene, which is when it is ripe."
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	"And you should know that gangrene is ripe when there is cessation of pain and fever, and around the time of decrease in redness and pulse, and when the head of the gangrene becomes sharp, and other signs."
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	"And it is necessary that you know that the piercing should be made near to the gangrene, at a place where there is little pus coming from the swelling."
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	"And piercing should always be done along the length of the flesh or body, if gangrenes are located in the parts of the thigh or leg, and in places where there are muscles, tendons, nerves, arteries, and especially in places where reflection is not present; for those that are reflected upon, use piercing according to that member."
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	"But when the gangrene is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave piercing until digestion of it is confirmed according to completion, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that time, the course of the passage from it is prolonged and much filth flows out, and quickly its lips become hardened and its depth increases."
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	"But some gangrenes are pierced according to the width of the flesh or body when necessary, or according to what that member needs."
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	"And it is necessary that you make a small piercing in small gangrenes, and a large piercing with wide incisions or many sections according to the diversity of the size of the gangrenes."
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	"And there are other gangrenes in which the cord should be curved and cut when it is made, so that it is finished at once like bread dough, as was done with troches of dewlap and buboes."
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"And of those that are incised with three angles in section; and there are those in which it is incised like the figure of a mitre leaf, as with gangrenes on the angle."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	"And there are some in which round section and crescent section are used, similar to those."
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	"But that one to which gangrenes do not extend like lion's paws on the surface, it is necessary for you to pierce it with superficial or flat piercing alone."
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	"And when the gangrene is large and has collected much pus, it is necessary for you to pierce it but do not try to extract all the pus at that time. Extracting a part of it and then packing the gangrene the following day, extracting more each time until it is completely drained."
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	"And especially if the patient is an elderly person of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man in decrepitude, for the animal spirit is often resolved with the exit of the pus, and quickly the patient dies, and you operate thus."
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	"Therefore guard this chapter with great caution, and also the piercing that you make in these gangrenes, making sure to cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the gangrene is small or has a flat section. If it is small, use linen or cotton dressings; but if it is large and the incisions of the piercing are many, then pause in each traction until they come together simultaneously."
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if in the gangrene a part of the cord is cut off or curved in its circuit, it is necessary for you to fill it with old cotton or thread made from linen cloth, like when baking bread or cakes without moisture; and strengthen that on the third day; and then process it and cure it with what is necessary for other wounds until it is healed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	"But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then use a cloth wrung out in cold water and vinegar and place it on the location of the bleeding many times."
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	"But if the bleeding persists, it is necessary for you to apply regimen and cure and powders which have been recommended in many places of this book and division."
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	"But if it is during wintertime and the location of the gangrene has many nerves, then you should make a poultice with hot wine and oil and apply it to those locations."
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is during summer and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply poultices made with water and oil or wine and oil, all of which has been cooked until the third day as we have said, and then drain the gangrene, cleanse it, and apply to its cure what is necessary for it until it is healed."
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	"And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the cure of gangrenes universally; but according to the way of distinction I have already said how each gangrene should be cured specifically in its own chapter."
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of sectioning gangrenes that occur on the neck of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the chain of the small head, posthemas appear, which are species of knots containing tunics that are made by them; and their species are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pimples, and those contain moisture like lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And there are those which contain moisture resembling dust, similar to them; and those that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of these there is no fear, since the extraction of them does not cause harm to the art.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you should spread them with an instrument whose shape is like this [drawing], called entromes, until you see that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is moisture, then immediately cut it with a section along its length into a surface section according to this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begin at the section of line .B. up to line .G. Then, once the moisture has been evacuated, immediately you should excoriate that by which that moisture was contained, and do not leave any cause of it, because viewed troops return if there remains any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And quickly immerse it in Egyptian cement, if available, and if not, in water and salt. Then fill it with that and leave it for another day, because with this you will corrode all that which remains of that skin layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And again apply that cement on it second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no trace of that skin layer. Then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"And if an abscess contains fatty knots, then you should incise it in this manner:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	"And if the section has a cross shape, then insert your needle between its two lips and cut it completely,
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	"If your arrow should go awry, then do what I have told you first."
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	"And similarly, perform the operation and treatment of an indurated ulcer according to what we have told you; for incision over an indurated ulcer is easier because it involves less blood and fluid."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	"And sometimes some of these ulcers are found on the head in certain men who have no moisture at all. The cause is that one once incised an ulcer on the head of an old woman and pushed the ulcer together like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be opened, and if anyone were struck by it, it would injure them."
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	"But in other accidental ulcers on the head, this is not the case, such as those that come to the heads of children and at the roots of the ears; but the incision of these should always be a superficial one."
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	"And pause the perforation of those that are in the lower parts, since it is intended to alleviate the body from the excessive heat in the lower parts."
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	"And accordingly treat those with what is appropriate for that kind of treatment."
Capitol .xlii.	Capital Forty-Two
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section on scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	These abscesses usually occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; however, sometimes they may occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are many that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have discussed.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the kinds of these scrofula are many; for some are hard and stone-like, others contain moisture, while still others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in that which you find to have good disposition upon touching it, whose color is similar to that of bone and is hard throughout, not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins or artery, then incise it with a superficial cut from above to below along the line GA across the line GB, and scrape it away completely, extending the lips of the wound with tweezers, or several tweezers if necessary, as we have said regarding the abscesses of the head, and remove it bit by bit.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that the vein or nerve be not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, lest it hurt your hand during the incision or cause further injury, and do not incise that which does not need to be incised; for if you should cut a vein or artery and interrupt your operation, then quickly apply cupping vessels or other powders that stop bleeding, and dress the wound, letting it rest until the inflammation of the abscess has decreased and the wound begins to heal.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When blood is discharged
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Then return to your operation once you have completed this step.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	"And then you shall ask with your little finger if there is any cause of the other small sores, and then cut those and cleanse them."
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	"And if it's in the area of a large vein, take care not to incise that scrophulus from its root."
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	"Then you must press it with doubled cloth firmly and let it fall inwards without injury."
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"And then fill the wound with cotton wool that you have already moistened in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"And if you cut that scrophulus entirely, then take care to join the two lips of the wound and dress it immediately afterwards so that there is no excess oozing left."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	"But if there is too much oozing due to the size of the scrophulus, then you should extend your incision towards its root, and draw it out and administer sutures as directed."
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And those scrophulas that contain moisture should be perforated with a superficial perforation where you see the point of maturation, and pause the perforation when you have expressed enough pus from beneath the skin, as we have said."
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	"And then administer an ointment and dressings similar to those used for ulcers, so that it may cauterize what has come out from the perforation."
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	"And when you see that the wound is already clean, then dress it with a healing ointment for flesh until it has healed."
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the incision of the head of an accidental impostume in the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	"Ancients called this section 'epilepsy,' but we have not seen anyone in our land who has had it."
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	"And this is the inscription of their sermon."
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	"And in men, epilepsy should be avoided because its extraction does not bring healing since all the veins and major vessels of the patient are here."
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	"But in those who have scabs caused by the mouth or ear, when the illness is not on the bone, it is necessary to avoid the section of epilepsy to prevent harm that occurs by suffocation."
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	"So when we want this, that we incise the epilepsy three or four circles of the circles of epilepsy, or with a small section across it in one who is between two circles in quantity, let the section be on the bone, not on the cartilage, and this place is convenient for sectioning because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels from its surroundings."
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	"And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the ear canal with forceps and carefully split the canal until it reaches the auditory canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any cause for this."
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	"And then incise the cartilage as recommended earlier; this is indicated on the section of the auditory canal by the membrane that is from there and which is from its disruption and for the extraction of pus."
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	"Then leave the wound open for some time."
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	"So when the time is removed at which perforation is feared, add two lips of the edge of the wound and cover only the cartilage."
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply medications that promote tissue growth so that it may heal."
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	"And Albucasis says that the essence of what has been recommended is to see that some of these abscesses have already obstructed the ear canal of the patient, and the disease has come inside causing death, and the air passage has been cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the wound for some breath, and be saved from death."
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And for this reason it is commanded to leave the wound open until the malignancy of the disease is consumed; and the malignancy lasts for three days; and then it is commanded to close the wound, and heal that until it may be healed."
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	"And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a woman took a knife and inserted it into her ear and incised herself with it through the auditory canal of the lung, and I was called to treat her, and when I arrived I found that she was dead like one who has died, and I discovered the wound and extracted some blood which had issued from the wound."
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	"So I was convinced that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the wind came out from the wound, and I healed it until it was healed."
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	"And nothing happened to the woman if she had not had something in her voice, and some days later she returned for an improvement of her condition."
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	"And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter .xlv."
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	"About an incision for an abscess that occurs in the external ear canal, and is called a herniation of the ear."
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	"This abscess named hernia of the ear is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it is common in women."
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	"And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally."
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	"And in the natural [way], it does not arise to be cured."
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	"And the accidental [way] is of two kinds: one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other kind is similar to an abscess which is made by the bursting of an artery, and in this there is danger."
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	"And it is only necessary to perform incision with iron on that which is asked for."
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then you examine it and investigate it with the finger, and if you find it similar to fatty nodes, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you incise it like nodes, and extract it with what contains it of skin and bursicle; but if not, then the whole thing is explored, and then the place is treated with whatever is necessary for treatment until it may be healed."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter .xlv."
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	"About section of kinds of nodes."
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	"There are many species of nodes, and I have already mentioned all the species of them in the division."
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	"And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a node and an exitura in case there may be doubt."
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	"I say that in an exitura there is heat and fever and violent pains until the ebullition of the superfuities is quieted; but it is completed putrefaction which now ceases the fever, pain and heat."
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	"But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains only chyle or lymph which is proper to the sac."
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	"And according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a pea and it becomes thus like an empty sac, whether large or small, and they are of two kinds: either fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division."
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a node, it is necessary to examine it and inquire into its beginning with an instrument which is called an introser, according to what will come in the following chapter on this subject."
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	"And this is the manner of inquiry for abscesses and all kinds of nodes: you take this instrument and introduce it into the moistest place which you find in the abscess, and you turn your finger little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the channel."
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	"And then lastly you extend your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the introser and consider what is issued in the trace of it."
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	"And if running moisture is found, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in other abscesses."
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	"But if there is no moisture in the trace of the introser, then know that it is fatty."
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	"And cut it with an incision having the shape of a cross thus:"
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	"As I have shown you, and suspend it with forceps, and strip the channel from all sides with ease, and preserve the skin or sac if possible over it, and extract that sanies along with the node."
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	"But if it is broken during the operation, then it is not possible to extract that sanies, and many times you will find there nothing, and then you extract it piece by piece until none remains."
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	"For if any cause remains of it, a little or much, the node returns according to its nature."
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And if you find that some small part of it remains, then fill the wound with some powdery acid caustic and strengthen the dressing, and apply over that which makes an abscess cure, and treat it with another treatment until it may be healed."
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	"If it is a large node, then cut the two lips of it and cure it with what heals."
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	"But if a pulsating vein is found near it, either pulsating or non-pulsating, then apply a compress and humidify the wound with triplets of treacle for two days or three until the dressing can dry out and the boiling of the blood may calm down; and then return to cutting away what remains of the node."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter .xlvi."
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	"About the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation."
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	"There are three kinds of introseres, that is to say the large ones, the medium ones, and the small ones."
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The great form of entering is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The middle form of entering is this
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The small form of entering is this
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They should have feet of iron, of almond-shaped, and well-shaped extremities, so that they may quickly enter the openings.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named Alberich, and one of them is called Berith.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three spices: large, middle-sized, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of great experience is this:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of experiencing evil, the form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of experiencing little, the form of it
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they should be for those apostemes and exits and fistulas and buboes, so that between those are of the bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And so they are made redontz, thick, large, like big needles with which the stitches are sewn, and they are made of lemon wood, or of oak, or of iron, or of silver. The best ones are when they are made of lemon wood
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made of black lead, which should be opened for those fistulas in the concavity of which reflections are reflected, that they may be reflected with their levitation with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And there are of three kinds: some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the narrowness of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form for a large lead plug:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"Method for the experiment of lead."
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"Method for the experiment of small amounts of lead"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The shapes of the rings are of several species, because some are simple ones, which are only a curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and medium."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And among these, there are circular rings, and they are of three kinds."
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"Among those that have two curvatures, there are also three kinds."
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among those with three curvaturas, there are again three kinds."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And all of these are necessary in their places."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"Shape of large simple ring, shape of light:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"Form for medium-sized simple ring."
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	"Form for small simple ring, shape of light:"
Forma de unci orp gran:	"Shape of large circular ring:"
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	"Shape of medium-sized circular ring, form of light:"
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	"Shape of small circular ring, shape of light:"
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"Shape of large ring with two curvatures:"
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	"Shape of medium-sized ring with two curvatures:"
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	"Shape of small ring with two curvatures:"
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	"Shape of large ring with three curvatures:"
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	"Form for medium-sized ring with three curvatures."
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	"Form for small ring with three curvatures."
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	"And these are the shapes of the scalpels used to cut and scrape nodes and apostemes, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small."
Forma de scapel gran:	"Form for large scalpel:"
Forma del scapel migier:	"Shape of medium-sized scalpel:"
Forma de scapel pauc:	"Form for small scalpel:"
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	"The extremities of those with which section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not-sharp, and they are not paused in such a way that there might be fear of incising a vein or nerve during scraping of nodes, and so that the malady may be healed and tranquility obtained a little by cauterization which follows the excision of the aposteme."
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	"And these are the shapes of spatulas, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small, as you see:"
La forma de magda gran:	"The shape of large spatula:"
Forma de magda migier:	"Form for medium-sized spatula:"
Forma de magda pauc:	"Shape of small spatula:"
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	"They are made of iron and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made."
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"And at the pointed extremity there is a hole hidden by the spatula and through that hole you can insert or remove sutures as you wish."
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	"The shapes of spatulas, which are used between the said ones for the perforation of apostemes and do not cause harm, come in three species: large, medium, and small."
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	"And these are the shapes of them:"
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	"The shapes of forceps used to remove blood flow and come in three species: large, medium, and small. The forms are as follows:"
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	"They are made of citric iron, round with some length, and they are subtle."
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	"And it is necessary that these species of forceps come in sizes large, medium, and small, so that by means of them blood flow can be removed quickly when needed, especially when there is no medicine at hand."
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	"However, do not use those for removing blood from all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy locations, such as in the joints of thighs and buttocks, elbows and nipples, belly button, and similar moist flesh."
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	"And sometimes those instruments are made of small pieces resembling fishhooks in this shape: with them blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy or through incision of a vein or artery."
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes they are made round like this:"
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter XLVI."
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	"Of the care of men's nipples, which resemble those of women."
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	"Sometimes the nipples of some men become swollen during sleep and begin to resemble those of women or even appear like apostemes from afar."
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you encounter such a case, you should incise it with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excise all the thickness, apply a poultice of caustic medication, and finally close the wound with sutures. Care for it until it is healed."
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the nipple leans towards its outer parts and becomes soft due to its size, as it happens in women, then it should be split into two parts lengthwise with two crescent-shaped incisions, each contained within the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form: from line B to line G. Then excise the node between the two lips of the wound, remove the suppuration, and administer what has been said about sutures and powders as necessary in its care until it is healed."
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you do not perform the incision that is necessary due to the turmoil of the ailment and blood flow, then you should apply a poultice of soft cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it on until it has eaten away what is necessary. Then care for it until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter XLVIII."
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	"Of the perforation of apostemes that come from the sides of the testicles."
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	"Those apostemes that arise from the sides of the testicles are of the species called scrofulas, hard ones which contain a point that can be extracted."
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	"And among those are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped incision according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the sanious matter has been evacuated, then fill it with soft cotton and leave it alone for another day."
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	"And then the cotton should be removed and the wound cared for with appropriate ointment until it is healed."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	"And if the aposteme is of the species called nodes or scrofulas, then incise it as we have said in the section on the treatment of scrofulous swellings."
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	"But if the wound has spread to the point of being difficult to heal, then apply cautery according to what we have said about it earlier."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX."
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	"Of the incision of apostemes that occur by means of an artery or a vein."
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	"When an artery is broken and the cord above it becomes consolidated, then often an aposteme occurs. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and aposteme are due to an artery or a vein: for when an apostema is caused by an artery, it is long and adherent in front of the body; and if you press on the apostema with your fingers, you will feel a creaking noise."
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	"And one that is due to a vein appears on the surface of the body."
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	"But the incision of this aposteme is an error, especially in those that are located near the armpits, groin, neck, and many other parts of the body; and it is very large, so its cure with iron should be avoided. And one that is on the extremities or the head should be avoided."
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	"But regarding those that occur due to inflammation of the sheath of an artery, incise along its length and then widen the incision with forceps and expose the artery. Then free it from its sheaths until it is completely exposed."
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	"And then place that needle on the other side and make it penetrate until it reaches the other side. Then tie the artery with double thread in two places, which will cause you to be able to extract two arteries that are located near the temples."
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	"And then pierce the place that is between two ligaments with a spit until all the blood comes out and the abscess is dissolved."
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply treatment that causes putrefaction between the fallen ligaments, and properly care for him until he is healed."
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	"And if it is an abscess caused by the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is nearest to the abscess on the skin, and then insert the needle where you have held it with your hand, causing it to penetrate; and be careful to make that hole double until you extract the blood from the other side, and then tie the abscess with good ligaments according to what I told you in the grapevine of two parts with two ends of the thread."
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	"But if you fear that the thread may come out, then insert the needle with the thread into the entire abscess through the first incision of the needle, and tighten your threads in four places."
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	"And then dry the abscess in the middle of it until what is inside comes out, and then incise the superfluity of the skin, allowing that which remains to remain tied."
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then place over it some powder that you have moistened in wine and oil, and then apply the treatment which is done with hot water and fomentations until he is healed."
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	**Chapter on Abscesses That Occur Due to Twisting of Nerves**
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	"Thus when an aposteme occurs in the artery and vein, similarly it occurs in the nerves upon percussion or through excessive labor."
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	"And it happens mostly in the places of the assistants or the heel, or in any place where one twists the joints."
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	"A large abscess has formed, resembling the color of other flesh, and is located in the thighs. When pressed with great force, it causes the patient to feel as if they are stunned."
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	"It is not an abscess attached to the front of the body; therefore it is left behind. It moves with every part and does not go before nor behind."
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	"Therefore, those that are located in the joints need not be treated with iron, for it would cause too much stiffness."
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	"But one that is on the head or forehead should be opened with a scalpel."
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	"However, if it is a small abscess, lance it with hot iron and excise it with a scalpel at its root."
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, excise it, and remove its outer skin. Then approximate the wound edges and adjust them with sutures. And care for it until it heals."
Capitol .li.	"Chapter 52."
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	"To cut open an abscess that has occurred on the cheek which has occurred on the belly."
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	"Also some men are seen to have warts on their bellies and on other parts of their body which are called fungals due to their similarity with those that have mushrooms; the cause of which is subtle and the head of that is large. And the lips of them are turned, and it is among those that are small, and it is among those that are greatly magnified."
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	"And I have already seen one, and on his belly were two things that resembled mushrooms very much, and there was no difference between them in terms of their whiteness and small size."
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	"And the lips of those were turned inward and split open, and moisture ran from it all the time."
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	"So I cut them open and removed one weighing eighteen ounces and the other weighing six ounces."
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	"And the operation in the incision of them is that you should consider whether the illness is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, and of subtle size. Then you should cut it open with a broad spatula, and have cauteries ready in the fire before you, because many times what is expelled from the section is much blood; and if blood comes to you, cauterize that."
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	"And if the illness is sudden and feared, beware of making an incision with iron. Rather, take fresh lead filings and sprinkle them on that spot, in the manner which has been said; and leave it for two days."
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	"And properly adjust according to the narrowness of the lead filings; therefore do not cease sprinkling it greatly until it is completely cut off and falls away by itself without further effort."
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	"But if that thing is of large size, then in cutting it open there is some cause for fear and dread, especially one that is in the belly."
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	"However, it is possible that you can cut off the head of it, and properly cauterize that spot so that it does not return."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	"And moreover, take care until the plague is healed."
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	"And beware that you do not presume to cut into that which is of dark color, little sensation, and regularly felt, for that is a cancer."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	"And here I bring back the memory of the crab properly in this place."
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the treatment of inflammation of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	Inflammation of the navel can occur for many reasons: it may arise from fissures in the skin that is over the abdomen, and then the thread or gut may come out from there according to where the other ruptures are; or blood may flow into it from a vein or artery according to what has been said earlier, or because of constricted wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure in the skin and the exit of thread, then the color of the swelling is similar to the color of the body; and there is little pain, but it appears suddenly in various situations.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is due to the exit of the gut, then its situation with regard to that which has been mentioned earlier is one of very great diversity, and when you press upon it with your fingers it disappears, but quickly returns; and there is much pain associated with it, and a magnificent quantity of bath water and violent effort are required.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then there is little pain, and it does not disappear when you press upon it with your hand, nor is it contracted or swollen.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is due to blood, then the swelling appears with these signs declining towards blackness.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to raw flesh, then the swelling is hard, thick, and tough, and fixed in place according to its quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	If it is due to windiness, then his touch is lion-like.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	If the swelling of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness, then you must be prohibited from treating him, for in that case there is fear and apprehension as has been taught in the chapter where it says concerning ulcers by an artery or vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the swelling of the navel is due to bile or tissue, then you should command the patient to hold his breath while standing upright and extend his body. Then take a tent and probe around the entire navel, and next, command him to lie on his back between your thighs. Next, encircle with a wide spatula in the area where you probed with the tent; then extract the contents of the swelling upwards using a large hook; finally, ligate it with strong flax or thread in an appropriate manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And next, hold the middle of the extracted swelling on the thread and insert your little finger into that opening and seek for the bile duct; and if you find it and hold it with the thread, then gently extract it and push it back into its place inside the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found tissue, then take that with a hook; and cut away the superfluities of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is against an artery or vein, then encircle that area and return to your operation. Then take two needles with strong threads attached and insert them into the circuit you have made around the swelling in such a way that they cross each other, making sure they penetrate well; then stretch the swelling in four directions over the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and let the location where the stretched skin was placed heal on its own. Or if it is thin, cut it when it has dried out and healed, and then dress the wound with something that promotes healing until it is completely healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to raw flesh in it or from moisture, then you should cut away the swelling as we have said and extract the blood or moisture which you find there. Then dress the wound with something that promotes healing and consolidates the location.
Capitol .liii.	Capítulo LIII.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	We have already said in the division of this book concerning cancer and its various types that it is treated with medicines. It is difficult to treat it by means of iron because it tends not to ulcerate easily; however, we have mentioned that cancer can develop from an untreated wound or sore.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer can occur in locations where it is possible to eradicate it completely, such as when it appears on the breasts or scrotum, and especially when it first begins small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But once cancer has become large and deeply rooted, it is not advisable to approach it because I have never seen anyone recover from such an illness nor do I know of any other treatment that could be effective.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And when cancer is located in such a way that it can be operated on, as we have said earlier, you should proceed by letting the patient's condition improve and purging them with black colchicum several times. Then, if there is a manifest swelling, excise it
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient for surgery by locating where the operation will take place. Then make an incision with a hook that is suitable for the situation, and carefully cut through all parts of the growth using the chain saw until there is no remaining cause for the spread of cancer.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow freely, then remove it gently and squeeze out any remaining blood from the area. Then wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument that you have at your disposal.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you have difficulty with thick blood flowing from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops. Then treat the wound with other appropriate remedies until it has healed.
Capitol .liv.	Capítulo LIV.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already mentioned in this division the different types of water dropsy and their symptoms, as well as how they are treated with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the type of water dropsy that is treated with iron is only the sole species of alithias. It is not advisable to approach this condition with iron treatment for the types known as tympanitis or hygrach because they are deadly.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of tympanitic dropsy with medicines and do not see any improvement in the patient's condition, then consider whether the patient has already reached a state of debility or if they suffer from another type of dropsy. If it is accompanied by other conditions such as coughing or abdominal discomfort, be careful not to treat it with iron because there is great danger involved.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if the patient is strong and healthy and suffers from dropsy alone without any other illnesses or weakness, then the operation should be performed as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"May be made of two pointed parts, long and sharp at one end like a sword; but it should have some shortening bit by bit, so that in the operation with it you do not penetrate into the intestines, and wound them."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	"And accordingly consider whether the generation of hydrocele is from the intestines, for at that time you should stretch along with the section from the navel by three parts to the left side, on the right side over the penis."
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	"But if the generation of hydrocele is due to disease of the liver, then your section should be left of the navel by three fingers."
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	"And if its generation is due to the mesentery, then your section should be on the right side."
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	"And it is necessary that your section be made over the side towards which you want to draw off the superfluity, so that it may not flow into that part."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	"And accordingly perforate with the instrument all along the cord, and properly entering that section, raise your hand with the spoon between the cord and the spermatic vessels, and you shall strip off that; if it amounts to one nail or more."
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	"And accordingly perforate the spermatic vessels within until the spoon reaches the desired place, and this is the place of water."
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And accordingly draw out that and enter with an instrument whose shape is as follows:"
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"And it is like a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or laton, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its extremity is cut obliquely in the manner of a feather, thus:"
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"And at its uppermost extremity there is an armilla, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that will suddenly descend over it, and thus you shall evacuate as much water from the middle ear in one moment, for if you evacuate more than necessary at that time, the patient may immediately die from dissolution of his animal spirit, or he may become paralyzed, which is a sign of approaching death."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"But evacuate according to the quantity of his virtue, and consider also the disposition of the disease, the virtue of the pulse, and the goodness or badness thereof."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And accordingly draw out the instrument and retain the water which is kept back by the cord, which retains the hole that you made over the spermatic vessels which I have told you to perforate in this manner."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And accordingly repeat the operation on another day if the patient tolerates it well, and draw off a little water each time; do this for several days successively with caution, taking care that not too much water remain."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you fear for the patient and let out too much water at once, then apply a plaster of hot sand to him, and bathe him with hot water, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize over the stomach and the belly near the place of extracting water, according to what I have told you concerning this that is precedent."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter Lv."
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	"On the treatment of children born with unperforated openings for urine."
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	"Sometimes, some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their mixture not perforated (either it is a narrow hole or it is not in its place)."
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, cover immediately upon perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very thin membrane according to this form.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then pause the wound with a subtle lead pin and tie that, and leave it for three days or four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, move him away and let him urinate; and immediately return him.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not remove the lead pin, it is possible that urine which falls onto this place will prevent it from closing
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one whose pin has been removed should be treated with lead pins, as we have said, for too many days until it has grown enough.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the pin is not removed from its place are called "leditz", whose cause is that those who are born and have their pin removed are deprived of the end of the penis so that they cannot urinate through it until they raise the penis with their hand towards the top; and this is not because of its generation, for then sperm could not reach the womb directly, which is a serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of performing this operation is that the patient should lie on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using forceful traction, and make an incision into the tip of the glans penis at the location of the urethral opening with a sharp spatula, like plucking out a feather, without cutting any skin, so that the meatus appears like the tip of the penis, and the pin falls in its proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful when performing an operation to stop bleeding, because it happens often that this occurs; pause the bleeding with whatever is at hand and dress the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter LVI
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of albinism which occurs in the foreskin of the penis, and of whiteness, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin to the glans penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often this whiteness occurs on the penis and is a growth of flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And among these, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	"Without malice, you should suspend it with a delicate hook and cut off only what is necessary, removing all of it completely. Then place your finger on that spot anointed with Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with fine linen until it is healed."
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	"If the condition is malignant and of dark hue, then you should apply a caustic agent close to the incision and wound's edge."
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	"But if the inflammation is in the foreskin of the uncircumcised glans, and one part of the inflammation is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the inflammation that is inside at the beginning until it has solidified. And afterwards, treat the exterior one, because when you treat both simultaneously, you cannot be certain that it will not become injured."
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	"And if gangrene occurs in the genitals and the foreskin appears black and inflamed, then you should cut away all that has already turned black and is about to decay or has already started to decay. And apply a plaster made from honey mixed with fine powder of barley groats and ground figs sieved."
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	"And treat it with another treatment until it is healed."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"But if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar caustic according to the following method:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"Because cauterization with a lunar caustic is for two purposes at once: it stops bleeding and prevents pus from being corrupted."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"And if the glans is corroded and completely destroyed at once, then you should insert a lead cannula into the meat of the foreskin so that the urine may pass through it."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans (and this adhesion only occurs in those who are not circumcised; and when it occurs due to pus or an abscess), you should carefully scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the glans is completely freed from all parts."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should cut some of the glans and foreskin with a sharp scalpel, because this is why the foreskin, when thin, easily adheres lightly due to its thinness."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And then separate the foreskin and the glans with a thread of fine silk that has been softened in warm water so that they do not adhere again afterwards."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And then treat it with astringent wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter 57."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"Of the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs in those who are circumcised."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	"Circumcision is not a continuous solution like other diseases. But since it is an operation of our own doing and will, and its proper place is in children, we must assign to it the best operation and easiest path leading to health."
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	"Therefore they say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it according to their laws. But this is only because we have acquired it through experience, which is why most artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a knife and probes. And they use a ligature with pitch and make an incision with the nail."
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	"And I have already proven that all these methods are inferior, and that the best purification is done with forceps, with a ligature of pitch used in purification as well as with the nail, because many times the cord of pus escapes upwards, because the cord of the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one remains outside. And it is often necessary to make another incision and cause certain pain."
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	"And in the purification that is done with a curette (a method used by barbers), it is not safe to make an incision at the end of the male organ, because it often goes into the urethra."
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	"But in the operation using a nail, you will often hit bone and ruin your operation."
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	"And the cord of an infant is naturally short, and many times it hangs in such a way that there is no need for purification. I have seen this myself."
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	"But concerning the purification that is done with forceps and ligatures of pitch, it is proven to me that they are good, because the forceps have a proportional incision, so that the sharpness that is above is equal to the sharpness that is below. And therefore when you press your hand proportionally with two sharp points, you will make an incision according to their comparison in one single movement; and there is compression of pitch with a shape containing the cord of the foreskin completely without any error."
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	"And the first method of operation is that you should keep the child quiet if he is one who understands a little, so that you only tie the pitch on his foreskin at first, and leave it there for another day."
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	"And then do everything in your power to make him happy according to what he understands."
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	"And then make him stay between your hands and prepare everything properly so that he is not afraid. And keep the forceps hidden in your hand or behind your ear, so that the child does not see them nor anyone else."
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	"And then place your hand on his foreskin and blow on the cord, and pull it out until the head of the foreskin appears. And then remove everything that has accumulated there from dirt."
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	"And then tie the designated place with a doubled pitch string and then tie another string a little lower. And then take it with your thumb and index finger and remove the loop from outside with good traction, and make an incision between the two strings."
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then raise the cord lightly and remove the head of the foreskin. And then let the blood flow little by little, because it is better that way. And apply powder on top, and over the powder place a cloth on which has been sprinkled fresh white wax melted in hot water with rose oil; and leave it there overnight. And cure him according to what is necessary for healing."
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	"This is the form of the forceps used for purification:"
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	"The outer ones are not-cutting and the others are cutting, so that they do not come out from between the jaws. And let the length of the two points be equal to the length of two thumbs when placed side by side."
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	"But the error in purification is that sometimes you may remove the entire inner cord or a piece of it through the incision."
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	"Therefore, you should extend it with your nail beforehand before the inflammation of the place and make an incision according to its equality."
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then remove it with tweezers and make the incision."
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	"But if three days have passed and there is still some inflammation on the inside of the foreskin, then leave it until the inflammation has softened, and remove it easily, and make an incision according to what you have prepared."
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	"And beware of the head of the foreskin, so that you do not wound it."
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	"And then cure him with what will consolidate the plague according to the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	"And if it has been cut properly, and you follow the guidelines above, then it will not harm him."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"And also cure him according to what we have said until he is healed."
Capitol .lviii.	"Chapter LVIII"
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	"On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder."
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stone or congealed blood, or by poverty or congestion.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is retention due to a stone already present in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over on their own hands.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Moreover, place weights upon that one's back and have them stretch out their belly from the point above their back down to their buttocks, while the patient strains as much as they are able.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the neck of the bladder is constricted and there is expulsion of the stone towards the behind, then the urine is discharged.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what has been said and the cause remains severe upon the patient, then extraction must be performed using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and carefully crafted like a quill pen of subtle thickness, about as long as a palm and a half, at whose end there should be a thin tube.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of extracting urine through it is this: Take the doubled skin and fold it over the end of the syringe's tube or wick for a good binding; insert the folded skin into the back opening of the syringe, cut off any excess skin with scissors if necessary, but forcefully insert it into the tube. Then apply pressure to the syringe with both hands and albumen of egg.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	"Prepare the patient on the bench, grasp their thigh and wrap it with warm oil, both olive oil and hot water."
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	"And carefully insert the probe until it reaches the root of the thigh; and carefully bend the thigh upwards at the point of attachment of the belly; and carefully push the probe inside that; and carefully push it further until it reaches the bladder, and if the patient is not yet empty, do not act according to this order, but wait for the moment when it will be straight."
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	"And now slowly pull out the probe with the wool little by little, because urine sticks to the wool."
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	"And then remove it and perform a curettage of urine, using a probe, do not stop until the bladder is fully emptied and the patient feels relieved."
Capitol .lix.	"Chapter 90."
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	"On the quality of clysters for the bladder with a clamp and similar instruments suitable for that purpose."
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"When an ulceration or abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood coagulates there, or it is obstructed by a stone, and you wish to instill waters and medicines into that, then use the instrument called 'clampcedra', which has this form:"
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	"but at its end, it is closed, so it is blocked."
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	"And in that there are three holes: two on one side, like this:"
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	"In the beginning was the hollow place, where that which is called 'it' resides, and its quantity may vary with no addition, except when some cause draws forth its humidity, it is drawn out; and when it is expelled, with it something else is drawn out; and when it expels long, according to what a lampwick does with naphtha in the battles at sea."
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	"Therefore, when you wish to expel humidity from the bladder, insert the end of the wick into the humidity and draw with it that which is expelled upwards, for the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the wick."
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	"And properly insert the end of the wick into the urethra as we have recommended in the circle; and properly expel the humidity with what you expel, for that humidity quickly goes to the bladder, and the illness ceases from it."
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	"And this is the form of the subtle sieve through which the bladder is sieved, and this is its form:"
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	"And it should be made of silver or lead, from which the top should resemble a small feather, and below that there should be a thin channel."
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	"And properly take the bladder of a beast, and place in it that humidity which you wish to sift into the bladder, and properly tie that between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat that humidity over the fire."
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	"And properly insert the end of the sieve into the urethra."
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	"Then stretch your hand over the bladder with humidity, with downward pressure, until you feel that the humidity has reached the bladder."
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	"If you do not find the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle with it; and pierce that circle all around its circumference. Then insert your finger forcibly into those folds, as they revolve, until you feel what you want from the humidities, oils, and waters."
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	"And then take it with the instrument, just as you did with the bladder, until you express with your hand that the humidity reaches the bladder."
Capitol .lx.	"Chapter .lx"
De extraccio de peyra.	"Of removing stones."
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	"We have already discussed in the division of stones and their removal through medicine, and the difference between stones generated in the urethra and those generated in the bladder, and their symptoms."
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	"And we have said that there is operation with hand and section [surgery] for stone."
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	"And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which remains in the bladder."
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	"And here we recount it with manifest exposition and abbreviation."
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	"Therefore it is said that stone generated in the bladder happens more often to children; and among its symptoms are: the urine that is expelled from the bladder is like water in its fineness, and appears in that area; the pain troubles the urethra, and often goes as far as the penis, and sometimes even beyond; and with that there is pressure on the anus."
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	"And it would be easier to cure children of this than those who have reached fourteen years old, as it is difficult for elderly people."
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	"But among the young ones, it is between them that it is more frequent."
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	"And of this one for whom the stone is large and its removal easier. But if it is small, it is contrary to that."
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	"Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this one, at the beginning of it, we should remove the pain with a cautery that extracts all the opening which is in its urethra; for sometimes that opening prohibits the removal of the stone due to the examination of it."
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	"And then let the pain be taken with its weight and compressed until it moves downwards so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder or falls out of its place sometimes."
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	"And then let that cautery be placed between the two thighs more prepared, and its parts should be towards the things of it, so that the whole bladder is inclined downwards."
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	"And then remove that and all of it before."
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	"Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, immediately cut open there with section [surgery]."
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	"And if it is not completely removed with that touch, then you should anoint with oil your little finger of the left hand if the pain is a child's or your middle finger if it is an adult one and insert that into its anus."
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	"And remove the stone which remains there with your finger."
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	"Then bring it out little by little towards the neck of the bladder."
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	"And then press upon that with your finger and expel it to the outside through the place where you made the incision."
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	"And command the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand and with his other hand remove the cord which is behind the genitals in the area where the incision is made."
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then insert a spatula beveled in this way:"
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	"and cut through it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle of them, on the side of the left thing; and let the incision be made over that stone and your finger should be inside the anus, and let the incision be transverse so that the opening outside is wide and inside narrow according to how much it is possible for the stone to escape through it, and no more than that, because otherwise your finger which is in the anus will compress the stone due to the incision, and it will remain forgotten without remedy."
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	"And know that there are some stones for which its edge and margin make it difficult to extract due to this reason."
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	"And of those things, one is like the glans penis, round, and its extraction is easy."
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	"Therefore, if it is that which has angles and margins, adjust it in the opening [incision]."
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	"And if it is not thus forgotten [removed], then you should press upon it or press upon it with gentle pressure using a tool like a chisel whose end is curved and does not slip away, or else insert into there a thin instrument with a curved extremity."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	"But if you cannot press upon it, then widen the opening a little and if you see blood flow, cut through that with gentle pressure using tripled vitriol."
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	"But if the stone is larger than one, then at first you press your hand on the mouth of the bladder and cut through there; then press a little more on it; and similarly do this if there are many stones."
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if the stone is very large, then it would be ignorance to cut through that with a large incision because one of two things happens to the patient: either it becomes accustomed [to the condition] or it continues with the distillation of urine, because the place is not completely solidified."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	"But instead administer expulsion of it from within so that it may be forgotten [removed], or press on the fracture of it with forceps in order to extract it piece by piece."
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	"Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with cloths of Aloes and dragon's blood, and press upon it."
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	"And place over that a linen cloth dipped in oil and wine or in rose oil and fresh water so that a cauterizing blister may be formed."
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	"Then let the patient lie on their back for three days without removing the stitches."
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"And once that has been removed, wash the place with water and much oil and then treat it with a fine liniment and a liniment of Diabazilon until it is healed."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	"But if an aposteme caut and corrosive forms in the wound, resembling as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of this urine is prohibited (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction."
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then wash the wound with sour wine, water, and salt, and apply any opposite [remedy] that is suitable for healing until it is healed."
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	"And during all the time of the treatment, you should lie with both thighs raised and adjust the medications which have been placed on the place."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the stone is small and in the middle of the penis, embedded in it, and urine cannot be expelled, then treat it with what I recommend before you come to an incision, because many have been cured by this treatment; and here it is: Take a pointed awl made of iron, whose form is as follows:"
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	"with a triangular extremity, sharp, inserted into wood."
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	"And then take pitch and tie it with that to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	"And then insert the iron into the penis, easily penetrating until the awl reaches that stone."
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	"And gradually turn the borer with your hand in that small opening until you've pierced through it so the other side can penetrate; for urine is then released."
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	"And press your hand over what has been broken off from the opening of the stone outside the penis, because that is constricted and forgotten with urine, and the patient will be healed."
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	"But if this treatment is not suitable for some reason which prevents it from being done, then place a bandage on either side of the stone."
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	"And cut into the stone with that penknife between two ligatures."
E aprop extratz aquela.	"And pull it out."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"And untie the ligature and clean the blood clots, which are formed in the wound."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	"And there is no need for a bandage on either side of the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the upper ligature prevents blood loss when it is untied near the entrance of the stone."
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	"And therefore, when you tie the upper ligature, it is necessary that you elevate the cord above the ligatures so that it does not return to its place and cover the wound as we have said."
Capitol .lxi.	"Chapter 61:"
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	"On the extraction of stones from women."
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	"Stones are rarely formed in women."
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	"But if a stone is found in one of them, it is difficult to treat it and there are many prohibitions regarding its treatment."
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	"The first prohibition is that women have delicate genitals."
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	"And the second is because you cannot find a woman who willingly reveals herself to the doctor if she is chaste or has been married."
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	"The third is that it is difficult to find a woman who knows this art well, especially regarding the operation of a stone with the hand."
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	"And the fourth is that the location of the section for removing stones from women is far from the location of the stone, which requires a deep incision and causes fear."
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	"But if necessity compels you to do so, then it is necessary that you find a woman midwife who knows well how to perform the operation and is not easily embarrassed."
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	"But if you are deprived of that option, then seek a skilled and subtle male midwife, or present an experienced woman midwife who is versed in the ways of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art."
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	"So bring that woman to you and command her to do everything that you order regarding the examination of the stone at the beginning; which is done to determine whether the woman is a virgin. If she is, then it will be necessary for her to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and seek out the stone."
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	"So if she finds it, then remove her finger and then command her to insert the probe on it."
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	"But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and seek out the stone, since she can place her left hand on the bladder and compress it well."
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	"So if she finds it, then gradually move her finger from the opening of the bladder towards its entrance, using all your strength until you reach the desired goal."
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	"And when you have reached that position, insert the probe on it, placing your finger behind the opening of the vagina where the stone is located. Keep your finger pressed against the stone until you remove the probe."
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	"The incision should be small at the beginning. Then insert the probe into that incision and if you feel the stone, adjust the size of the incision according to the quantity that you know will come out from there."
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	"And know that stones are of many kinds: some are small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and have branches."
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	"So you should know how many kinds there are by what you have indicated regarding what you want to know."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	"If you see bleeding, apply a bandage soaked in vinegar and hold it there for one hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation until the stone is removed."
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	"And make sure you have prepared the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones from men, so that they may assist you in your operation."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	"If you see bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is from the incision made in the urethra, then apply powder to the location and strain it with dry bread crumbs and stricture descent. Do not repeat this action; leave the stone and do not extract it, for otherwise the patient will die."
E aprop cura la plagua.	"And then dress the wound."
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	"So when the sharpness of the bleeding has subsided after several days and the location is healed, then return to your operation until the stone is removed."
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision for strangulated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A strangulated hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white sac that is outside the abdomen containing the intestines, and it is called a "sac."
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it is seen in the proper paniculus that Nature prepares for him at the time of birth, even though it might be another one; and this is the cord of the genitourinary system between the white cicatrix which we have mentioned, but this is not all.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The cause of this hernia is weakness which occurs in the genitals, causing that matter to protrude through them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow received on the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	This fluid has various colours, for its colour can lean towards citrine or sanguineous red, or brown, or it can be blackish-feculent or watery-white.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are these: for if it is in the white cicatrix that we have mentioned, then the swelling will be somewhat elongated and egg-shaped, and the genitals will appear, as the fluid contains them on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the fluid is in the proper paniculus, then the swelling will be round like an egg and it is estimated that it is another testicle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the fluid is between the cord of the genitals and the white cicatrix, then the sensation will be to the left.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you wish to know the colour of the fluid, then press on the colour of the fluid in the swelling with a thin catheter whose form is preceded; and according to what appears in the trace of the interior, judge what lies beneath it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then we must command the patient to be flebotomized if this is possible for him, and empty the body of it completely.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And let him lie on his back on some cause a bit higher up, and place to the left a few cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then you sit on the left side of him and command the minister to stand on the right side of him, who will extend his whip hand to one of two latts at the cord of the genitals and at the parting of the navel of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad knife and cut the cord of the genitals from the middle place along its length, close to the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	"Make an incision according to the rule, evenly spaced from the line where you should grasp the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white navel."
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	"Remove that, observe it, and be careful not to cut it. The removal should be done gently yet skillfully, with the amount of skin removed being as much as possible."
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	"Next, perforate the belly full of water with a wide perforation and extract all the water."
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	"Next, separate the two lips of the incision with forceps and extend the belly at its sides. Do not touch the cord connecting the genitals, and make your incision in this manner as much as is possible."
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	"And incise it completely or in pieces, especially its sides subtly, for if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return."
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	"But if you proceed from the outside of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the incision on the belly, return inside it and immediately join together the two lips of the cord of the genitals with sutures, and then take care of it just like other wounds until it is healed."
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	"And if you find the belly corrupted by some other illness, then it is necessary to ligate the vessels that are near the suspensiony ligaments, and extract the belly, and then take care of it with what we have said."
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	"But if the water accumulates in two places at once, know that there are two hernias present. Therefore incise that side just as you did on the other side, and if it appears to be an operation, then perform it."
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	"And then you should cleanse the blood, and enter into the incisions with wool soaked in oil or rose oil. Then place over this another wool soaked in wine and oil, and spread it out over both of the genitals and the belly button. Then place folded cloths and powders over it, and bind them together with bandages in this manner:"
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	"And then two cloths are taken and filled with wool carded in this manner. The ends of them are tied with cotton or wet wool, and they are attached with a bandage in the fly of the breeches, and one end takes the buttocks between the two, and the other end takes the groin, and two bands on both sides and two others above the thighs, and all tension should be adjusted in the fly of the breeches."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of an incision with iron. And if you take a thin cautery needle and incise the cord of the genitals with it, and light it according to what we have recommended until the white belly containing the water is revealed, then you should take cautery in this manner:"
e es asemblat a letra greca.	"And it resembles the Greek letter gamma."
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	"And then pierce that belly with it, and light it until all the moisture is driven out."
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	"And then extend the belly with forceps, and tear it open with forceps, and cauterize it with a thin lit forceps. And incise it according to what is possible for you until you have removed all of it. And be careful that the belly does not touch the fire."
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	"And know that this operation is safer and farther from bleeding than an operation with incision."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	"But if you encounter an aposteme or bleeding during the time of incision or cautery, or bleeding, then you should take care of what is causing this to you according to what has been said."
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	"But if the patient is fearful and does not wait for a second operation due to its horrible nature, then perform a perforation according to what you recommend. And this should be done when you are certain, based on what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is hydrocele."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	"Then you should make the patient lie on some elevated pillows. Then perforate the aposteme at its lowest part with a wide spatula, and continue the perforation according to the length of the body."
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	"And let the opening be wide enough that all the water may run out."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	"And then place cotton on the spot and bind it there, so that the remainder of the water may drain off."
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then treat it until the wound is healed."
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	"But if there is difficulty in the discharge of water at that time, then perforate it: and this happens only when the white panicle at the opening of the wound causes difficulty and prevents the escape of water. Then you should place into the wound a trocar or instrument with which the water is extracted from hydroceles, as shown below, or fit into the opening of the wound a small tube."
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	"And know that the water returns, and it accumulates again after about six months or approximately those times. And when it has accumulated, then it should be perforated in the same manner as before, for the patient will thus spend his days."
Capitol .lxiii.	"Chapter LXIII."
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	"Chapter on fatty hernia and its cure."
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	"You should know that in this section about this hernia, great caution is required to avoid injury during the operation; for this reason, it is my recommendation to dismiss the surgery and save the patient from it."
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	"And remember the operation that was performed on him and the specifics of his abscesses."
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	"Therefore, I say that abscesses are formed in the bodies of those whose veins are affected and this happens for many causes: either due to acute severe inflammation which overflows into the veins, or due to injury."
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	"And its color matches that of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, indicating a severe abscess."
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	"And a hard, elevated, encapsulated abscess with dark skin coloring, which is insensitive to touch."
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	"And sometimes it occurs due to the knotting of arteries, and inflammation of these vessels is perceived before remembering the injury itself, or due to venous inflammation."
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	"But what is caused by inflammation of arteries is known by the spreading out of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not require touching."
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	"But one that is caused by inflammation of a vein is not spread out by pressing it with the fingers due to its hardness."
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	"And it is possible that with this type of abscess there may be an incision made into other flesh; and this occurs when you insert the chain of veins, and then stretch the skin upwards at its edges, extract the white cylinder, deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and then cut the suspensory ligament as you completely free it from all attachments to the skin."
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	"So if the skin is firmly attached to those tissues, then you must extract the skin and incise that area."
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	"And if there is adhesion between the cylinder or between the vessels for any cause, then you must release all that adhesion and make a round incision."
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if there is a birthmark of flesh in the place of adhesion that is behind it, then you must incise all that and extract the skin as we have said."
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"So once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine, and afterwards dress it with the other dressing until it heals."
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter LXIV
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of a hernia that occurs in childhood.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	A hernia in children is an abscess wrapped in some kind of wrapping resembling a bud with softening of the testes, and it makes difficult exercise and walking for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in treating this condition, fear is the cause of what preceded its onset.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must speak about the operation on it according to how it first appears.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	"I say that you should place the patient on an elevated pillow; then expose the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to the parts left uncovered; and then take hold of the tendon of the hamstrings with your fingers, as close as possible to the thighbone; and have another servant help you, stretching them with great vehemence."
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	"And then make an incision with a sharp knife along the right side of the vessels where they are uncovered."
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	"And then strip away all the surrounding parts, just as we have said in the extraction of an arrowhead from the temples."
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	"And then place a needle with double thread in that location where you first saw the vein appear, and tie it there; then tie it again at the last point where it disappears."
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	"And then cut that in half with a straight incision along the length of the body and remove what has accumulated there from the putrid and corrupted moistures."
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	"And then treat the wound with the usual treatment for wounds to ensure that it heals well and does not fall prey to gangrene from one or both testicles, as this would be unfortunate."
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	"But if all the veins are visible, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or to tie them off with the veins, as they would otherwise be deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the veins. Then they should be cauterized, or else cut off so that there may be no harm from them."
Capitol .lxv.	"Chapter LXV"
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	"Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia."
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	"The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that occurs in the peritoneum spread out over the abdomen on the side of the abdominal muscles, causing some intestines from that rupture to protrude."
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	"And this rupture is either due to the ciphac or exception of him, and it happens thus these two species for many causes: either percussion, or leap, or cry, or elevation from some heavy cause, or seeming."
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	"And the sign of that, when it is by extension of the ciphac, is that it happens little by little over a long time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an aposteme growing within the preon due to the ciphac compressing the bowel."
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	"And the sign of him is when it is by section of the ciphac, for at the beginning it causes sudden violent pain; and it is an aposteme different appearing near the duodenum appearing, and that is by emission of the bowel, and its body towards the parts outside of the ciphac."
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	"And sometimes it happens that the tissue is forgotten in the bowel, and this is called intestinal hernial."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	"And sometimes it is accompanied by windiness, and sometimes it runs in the bowel furrow, and here it is retained, and there is great detriment of health with this, and sometimes it causes bad pain, especially when pressed."
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	"And in the treatment of these species of this illness with iron, there is fear because it is necessary to avoid cauterization in that."
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	"And the manner of the operation for this is that you order the patient to reduce the bowel with his own hand to the parts inside his concavity if he obeys its return, and then it should be covered over with his cloak between your hands, and elevate its chambers."
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	"And then stretch the duodenum which lies above the duct of the testes to the parts above, and incise the duct of the testes entirely along its length; and then insert two clamps of the section as you need them to open the section with those."
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	"And if, according to the quantity of that which is possible for you, it should happen that that part is forgotten."
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	"And then excise that cisphac which lies near the duct of the testes until the white hard cisphac is discovered on each part."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	"Then you insert your finger into that which lies the testis, into that which is between the white cisphac, which lies near the duct of the bowel, and between the cisphac second, and separate with that adhesion which is in the part behind the bowel."
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	"And then take with your hand the duct of the testes to the parts forward, and with this extend the white cisphac above with your left hand, and elevate the bowel with the cisphac at the part of the section; and command the assistant that he extends the bowel outside and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution."
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	"And then carefully examine with your fingers to ensure that there is no cause of the bowel being enclosed in the white hard cisphac."
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	"But if you find any cause there, then you pull it into the abdomen from outside."
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	"And then you take a needle with which is thick thread of wax, and insert it behind the end of the cisphac which lies beneath the duct of the testes which is the section; and then incise its extremities which emerge from the thread until there are four threads, and then compress some of them over some figure in the manner of a cross; and tie with that cisphac of which we have spoken that it lies near the duct of the testes with strong binding of two parts."
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	"And then wrap the extremities of the threads and tie them with strong binding until some of those vessels that nourish them cannot transmit any cause through which an abscess may occur."
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	"And pause another binding according to the first binding, distant from it three fingers; and then these two bindings leave that cisphac which lies near the duct of the testes the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and incise all the remainder according to roundness, and leave from it the bowel."
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	"And then incise in that part near the duct of the testes through the section from which blood and pus flowed, as we have recommended before."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	"And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and apply the suture which we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white cisphac which we have mentioned near the incision of the bleeding point, for many times this happens), and leave the suture until it falls by itself."
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	"But if the wound closes late, then boiled water should be wrapped around it, and placed upon it until it falls as we have said."
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvi.	"Chapter 66"
De hernia ventosa.	"On Ventous Hernia"
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia, no one has been burned during its cure with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	The first step is done as we recommended in the case of a hernia caused by water: lie down on your back and raise your hips close to the section over that area with ease; then dry the middle part around the abscess with water boiled with salt.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	Cure the wound as we said until it is healed
Capitol .lxvii.	Capítulo LXVII
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, rupture occurs in the hemorrhoids as we have said, and it becomes inflamed.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give any laxatives to the patient without cause; if you do give them, it is little; and they return in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with that, it makes an anal fissure in which the intestine opens into the anus; and this happens because of the extension of the anus which is in the hemorrhoids as we have said, which causes the anus to stretch, soften, and become inflamed and swollen.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And its cure is with cautery, as will be described later in this book.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this method: and that is for the patient to sit on his heels between two stools, and then dry the area of the rupture of the swollen abscesses with a cut made horizontally according to its size.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the anus white which is below the spine so that it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take a probe and place it on the most prominent part of the anus, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then cut both prominent parts on either side of the probe's end in the anus, and join them together with a suture.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the end of the probe, and do not insert anything into the anus at all, nor extend it further, nor any other cause as you will know better in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat it with the treatment for piles, and when you cut the veins, cleanse them and restore the pile so that it is consolidated; for the anus contracts and the prominence of the rupture does not remain.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter LXIX
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the scrotum's cord.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Many times the scrotum's cord in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is noticeable by its appearance.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one who is to treat him that they make the patient lie down on their side, and remove all clothing softened over the natural skin; and then join two lips with stitching.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, at first the excess of softened skin can be removed with three or four cuts and firm stitching.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the stitches, and also treat other wounds until they heal and discharge occurs.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxix
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is condemned in our law, but due to the request of certain people it has been written about in this book; and its remembrance is necessary only for two ways: one because it is within the knowledge of doctors when they are consulted regarding such things, knowing how to treat them; and the other way is that we often need castration of other beasts for our own use, as with dogs, goats, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting with a section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by crushing, the way of performing it is that we seize the beast in cold water until its testicles become softened and lengthened and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take them with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear hard to the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by cutting with a section, you should hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lift up the suspending ligaments, and cut across each one with a section so that two openings result.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those which will appear to have burst open.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	"Ignore causes related to the liver, except for a subtle liver condition that affects the veins."
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	"This method of castration is better performed by crushing because strong crushing leaves no cause for the testicles to desire copulation."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And appropriately treat the plague until it is healed."
Capitol .lxx.	"Chapter .70."
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	"On the cure of hermaphrodism."
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	"Hermaphrodism in males comes in two forms: one is when it appears as an empty space between the two testicles, where there are two testicles but a vagina-like opening figures between them."
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	"And sometimes urine flows from that spot which is in the chain of the testicles."
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	"In females, it is one type: when the vagina opens above the pubis just like two male testicles, slightly larger and thinner at the opening of the vulva, like the male penis and two testicles."
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	"And its treatment is divided into three types: two for males and one type for females."
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	"And it is necessary that you insert those attached flesh parts so that the urine does not escape from there, and also heal them with care just like other illnesses."
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	"And in the second type of males where urine flows which is in the chain of the testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it."
Capitol .xxi.	"Chapter .21."
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	"On lentigo (freckles) and raised flesh caused by women."
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	"Freckles are naturally attached, they appear and disappear according to the weather; sometimes they are more pronounced in some women that they spread like in men and even during intercourse."
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	"Then you should remove the excess freckles with your hand or with oil and insert it."
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	"And do not make an incision in the end, especially on the front of the nose, to avoid bleeding."
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	"Then heal it with treatment for skin diseases until it is healed."
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But raised flesh is flesh that grows on the skin of the mother's womb and fills it up. It often resembles coal at its opening (and for this reason some first called it "cow's illness"); therefore we should remove it just like freckles, and heal it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxii.	"Chapter LXXII."
De curacio de alratica.	"On the treatment of a sore throat."
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	"A sore throat is when the woman's passage is not pierced or has a small hole."
E es o natural o accidental.	"And it can be either natural or accidental."
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	"Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded, and it is caused by excess flesh or attached skin, or thick and dense cicatrix."
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	"And it is caused either in the front of the womb or on its sides, or above or below it, and it prevents coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth. It often also inhibits menstruation."
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	"And the diagnosis of this condition is made by examining the uterus through the vagina if dilation is apparent. But if it is not apparent, you should examine it with your fingers or with a probe."
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	"But if the dilation is due to a thin cicatrix and it is apparent between the two lips of the vulva, then cut it and tear it apart."
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	"And if it lies on top of both labia majora, then gently press your fingers together from both sides towards the middle."
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	"And let the woman lie on her back with her legs extended. Then gently spread both lips with force until that thin cicatrix is broken and dilation is achieved."
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	"And then take some wool dipped in oil, place it on the location, and leave it for a day so that the area does not stick together."
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	"But if the cicatrix is thick and dense, then you should cut it with a broad-bladed knife or with a myrtle leaf."
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	"But if dilation is due to attached skin, then suspend that skin with oil and cut it."
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	"And use medicines that stop bleeding without causing injury, such as achiote and dragon's blood, and hyssop mixed with egg white."
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	"And then insert a wide lead cannula to ensure that the wound does not heal too quickly."
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	"And keep it like this for several days and apply poultices of linseed."
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	"And then heal it with other treatments to consolidate it until it is healed."
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	"And sometimes during childbirth other flesh also comes out, so you should cut according to this method."
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	"But if this is due to a bone abscess, then do not use iron in any way on the bone abscess that is in the womb."
Capitol .lxxiii.	"Chapter LXXIII."
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	"On the treatment of hemorrhoids, prolapse of the rectum, and red tumor that occurs in the vagina of women."
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	"Hemorrhoids are a condition where multiple veins at the anus become varicose and continually bleed. And when these hemorrhoids become old, they hang down like grapes."
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"And I have already spoken in the division about the species and signs of these hemorrhoids, and I will say now which ones receive treatment and which ones do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	"So I say that hemorrhoids that are in the front of the womb and do not appear at examination should not be treated with iron."
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	"But those that are at the opening of the vagina and can be felt with the fingers are those that receive treatment."
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"And you should place the woman in a warm bath and then gently spread her buttocks with forceps or rough cloth, and cut those hemorrhoids with razors."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	"And then sprinkle powder from one of the non-injurious cutting powders on those places where bleeding occurs, such as aloes and similar things."
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	"And then have her press her feet against something for an hour, and then place her in warm water."
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	"And if bleeding persists, then have her drink a decoction of suma and the rind of pomegranates and citrons and similar things."
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	"And then take some barley flour, mix it with honey, vinegar, and wine, and make a poultice with this to place on her back."
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	"If blood is emitted, that is good. But if not, then apply two cupping glasses and perform scarification on the breasts."
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or the juice of radish or the juice of garlic mixed with wine, and apply it to that place. And then treat that place with egg whites until it is healed."
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	"But prolapse of the rectum that is rough and irritating should be cut according to what appears to you from that which I have said about engulfing prolapse."
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And treat it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxiv.	"Chapter LXXIV."
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	"On accidental perforation of the bladder in the womb."
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	"Many species of abscesses can occur in the womb, such as bone spurs, stone-like abscesses, ulcers, adhesions, hernias, fistulas, hemorrhoids, cracks, prolapse, and other abscesses."
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	"And I have already spoken about these diseases, the species of them, their signs, and their treatments in the division."
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	"And it is necessary that I say in this treatise about cauterization of an abscess that occurs in the womb when it is from those abscesses that become healed, and if you want to know how the operation of it with iron is done."
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	"Therefore, you should consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever. If it becomes red and if it is painful when touched, then do not cut it with perforation, but treat it with something that helps maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases."
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	"And now you must place the woman upon a chair that has two arms; she should recline on her back and adjust her feet so they rest just below her belly, with her thighs spread wide. Then, place her arms by her sides in a way that is suitable."
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	"And then the midwife proceeds on the right side and administers the instrument with which the opening of the mouth is widened, the form of which will come forth in those cases that are about to be made."
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	"And when you want to administer this instrument, make sure it enters the mouth of the woman just until the point where the throat begins, and no further than that."
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	"But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the mouth, then you should place powders on the surface of the throat so that the entrance of any instrument into it is prohibited."
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	"And it is necessary that you place a thread on the end of the instrument on the right side and above, so that when the midwife administers the instrument she may hold onto the thread and rotate the thread inside until the opening of the mouth is widened."
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	"And when the birth emerges and it is touched by the hand and is wet and soft, then you should catch that one with your hands using the spatula made of latten."
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	"And when the placenta is expelled, then you should place in a dish submerged in rose oil or verdigris oil which has some astringency and place it at the section of the throat."
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	"And then cover the mouth and over the vulva put clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled."
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then it should be treated again two days hence, using this remedy that should suffice to heal it."
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	"And sometimes the wound and the inflammation are washed with a solution made of water and honey, or water in which iris root or long-rooted artichoke has been boiled, and then it is returned to the remedy."
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	"If the inflammation is inside the wound, it is forbidden to treat it with iron; then one should use the remedy mentioned earlier in this section."
Capitol .lxxv.	"Chapter Seventy-Five"
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	"To teach midwives how to treat the drunk woman who is pregnant, when it presents itself abnormally."
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	"It is necessary for the midwife to recognize at the beginning the figure of a normal birth through its signs, namely when she sees the woman pressing her thighs and desiring to smell the air, and then she feels relieved by that which comes over her from below, and the expulsion of the child is hastened, she knows that this birth is according to nature's figure, i.e. the child comes out upon its head, and the second one either suspended or hanging from the navel."
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	"So when you see these signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly be pressed so that the embryo comes out gently, since when the first one comes out upon its head, the second one will follow, and it should be cleaned of those impurities with good cleansing."
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	"But if it is another than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the child comes out upon its feet and its body emerges before its head, and its feet are out first, or one hand comes out first, or a foot, or even the head with one arm, then it turns violently onto its neck, these are like those figures that are not praiseworthy."
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, so that she may guard against error and deception."
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	"And I am showing you here the figure of those [birth positions], and what kind they are in each one, so that it may be indicated by this and understood."
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	"When the fetus comes out upon its head by natural impulse, and it is violently expelled from the woman and difficult to bring forth, so that her strength is already weakened, then one should do this: let women hold her and evaporate the pain of her womb with fennel cooked with honey and moistened with olive oil."
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	"And accordingly the midwife should insert her finger between those little lips and tear open with it the second one or break through that with her nail which is inside where there is humidity."
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	"And press the woman's belly so that she expels the fetus."
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"But if it does not come out, then it is necessary to lubricate the woman with mustard plaster and fennel plaster with honey."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	"And accordingly command her to be pressed and make her sneeze with incense; and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour, because the fetus will soon be forgotten."
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	"And if both legs of the fetus are forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary to reduce them little by little with ease."
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	"But if it does not obey the assistance, then place the woman upon a stool and lift up its legs, and strike the stool against the ground, so that the woman may not fall due to the concussion."
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"And if the legs do not turn back and the fetus dies, then incise those [legs] and remove the afterbirth of the fetus or tie its body with cloth and remove it gently because that will be forgotten."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	"Of emergence of the embryo upon its feet."
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the patient lies on their back, then you should press those legs upward, and promptly turn the foot slightly inward, and then tie that up, and promptly take one of their feet and extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Once he is inside the space [between the thighs], then you should command him to press down, and make that sneeze with certain conditions, because sometimes they forget if God wants it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if he doesn't forget what has been said above, then you should gradually return the foot to its natural position until it stops, because sometimes they forget with light pressure.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if all that has been said above is prohibited, then take some ground aloe and dissolved gum, grind it well in the mortar with good percussion, and promptly apply it to the woman's womb, the lowest part of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And promptly make her drink water infused with dillseed, until she obtains relief from her hypochondriac condition.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	"And sometimes when the parts are left uncovered by him, then he should undergo fumigation with myrtle and rest upon it."
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	"And when the fumigation lasts an hour, then you should make him sneeze over a cloth, and at that moment, remove it from his mouth, and press the lower part of his belly with gentle pressure, because the wind is quickly forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Examination of the stool on its linen covers and its clothes.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the feces have been examined in this manner, then you should carefully insert your hand between his buttocks; and at that point, let the woman sit upon her heels, lean forward on her elbows, lower her body weight onto her knees, and rest her buttocks on the bedsheet, closing his buttocks.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently upon his belly little by little, and at the same time remove that which remains between his buttocks with a cloth prepared for this purpose.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the feces have not been expelled, then grasp his buttocks and move them vigorously, and at the same time press gently upon that which remains on the hypochondria until the feces reach the exit passages.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your hand between his buttocks and gradually push out the feces using the gauze, and command the woman to press upon her belly until the feces have been fully expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Examination of the lateral folds of the buttocks with one of his buttocks.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	If you cannot reduce it with your hand, then elevate the woman's hips and make her bear down.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot bear down, then have her lie on the bedsheet, and strike his buttocks vigorously with your fist, and then administer laxatives composed of honey or mucilages.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the birth is imminent, then have her sit upon a chair and then examine the reduction of the hand, and push out the feces according to its natural form using gauze, and make the woman sneeze and command him to press upon himself until the feces are fully expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Examination of the feces on his colon as his buttocks are spread and his mother's fascia is on his back.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	That the midwife should have her hand inside the child and gently rotate it, facilitating its passage.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when that has been done and as much has been pushed out, then pause upon the child's fundament with what we have recommended of oil and mucilages.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command him to move his buttocks little by little, and when you have done that, then have her sit upon a chair and command her to lean over the right side, and then command him to press down; and make her sneeze with a condition.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the child prepared on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they make horrible faces at you as per this method, consider that and then insert your second finger with your nail into the fundament until it has been emptied of fluid.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the child is suspended upon its face and colon, then insert your hand into the belly, so that it may not be retained and die.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the child out through its passages little by little until it is born, and command the woman to press upon herself several times, and may he be expelled with gentle examination if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and unusual. It has natural causes and does not happen often.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count them, even if they are multiplied, as one fetus, and separate them by chiasm, distinguishing those between the ligaments in the navel of each. And sometimes they are expelled just like one fetus through gentle natural examination, but sometimes they are expelled through painful examination as we have recommended
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of them are difficult to bring forth during birth and they have come to what we have said about the unnatural figures, then cure them as we have recommended.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with facility and subtlety, and patience, and is ingenious according to all figures as they are prepared for her by the art leading to health
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and aborted
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten are formed in the womb, and I have verified that one woman aborted six, and another bore ten all formed. The cause of this was made known by the measurement of the glorious wise ones.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this should be in the knowledge of the midwife that she may know what to do in such a case, and therefore pause if it is necessary to do so.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter LXXVI
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the dead fetus
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled naturally, and you see that force must be used with your hand, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and does not have any of the accidents by which danger to her may be feared.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman should be placed upon the bed on her left side, and let her head rest in a low place and let her hips be elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold her from both parts, or lie on the bed with her, so that his body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then moisten the mouth of the womb with humid oil and mucilage of marsh mallow and fenugreek and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with these oils and mucilages, and then insert her hand gently into the womb, and then search around with her hand for where the hooks are on the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	The convenient places for this are: then consider if the fetus is prepared to come out on its head, and then place the hooks in its heels or in its neck or in its mouth or in its palate or below its beard or in its collarbone or in the places near the ribs or below the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if it is coming out on its feet, then in the perineum or in the middle of the back
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	It is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand and pause its curvature in that place which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently and place the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned until it reaches the cause of birth.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and place another hook or the third one if necessary so that there may be equal traction and not too much extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And let it be moved in every birth so that the expulsion of it may be alleviated just as is done with teeth when they are extracted.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary that between them the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them gently and turn around what has been retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the birth of the fetus is difficult, then the hooks should be changed to another place where it may be pushed further out; and do this until the whole fetus has been expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand becomes exposed before the other one and it is not possible to reduce it because of its curvature, then a cloth should be wrapped around that; and then extract it until all has been expelled, and cut it off at the junction of the hand or in the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	"And similarly do in the other hand and both feet."
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"If the fetus's head is large or if there is some constriction in the pelvis or if it is in the neck of the womb, then it will be necessary to insert between the aforementioned spines and split the head open and extract the waters, or else use an instrument called “alundat,” the shape of which will come along with the shapes of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one."
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	"And similarly do if the fetus has naturally a large head: and then it is necessary to insert this with forceps, or take hold of it with an “alundat” as we have said before; and afterwards extract the bones with forceps."
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	"And if the head is exited and is constricted above the pubis, then it should be opened up so that the fluid which is in the uterus may flow out."
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	"But if there are no complications or signs of imminent delivery, then you should proceed to extract the head little by little according to your ability."
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	"And if the lower part of the abdomen is inflamed or there is dropsy in it, then you must pierce it so that the fluid which is within may flow out."
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	"But if the fetus is lying on its back, then its attraction will be lighter and its direction towards the mouth of the womb will be easier."
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	"But if it is constricted above the belly and the uterus, then you must extract it with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the belly and uterus so that what is inside may flow out."
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	"But if the other members are exposed and the head returns, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the womb is closed, then insert your hand into the lower abdomen and grasp the head with it, and pull it with those things into the mouth of the womb, and immediately insert a hook or two hooks, and pull it with those."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	"And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by hard adhering clots which have occurred at birth, then it should not be troubled over that; but rather it is necessary to administer a copious evacuation of fatty humor."
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	"And apply plasters and follow up the patient with waters that soften and moisten."
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	"If the patient is on their side, if possible it should be made flat; and let them be given what has been said for a live patient."
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	"And if this is not possible, then they shall be incised with scissors, and it shall be extracted."
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	"Ensure that no cause remains within the second one."
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	"And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what has been said about the cure of burns from which this may occur."
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	"If there is bleeding, then apply styptics in water and administer the other cure."
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	"And I have seen a woman whose fetus was dead in her womb, and immediately afterwards she became pregnant again, and the other fetus was also dead."
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	"It happened that a long time after an ulcer appeared on his belly; it became inflamed inside the opening and began to discharge pus."
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	"And I was called in to treat him, but even though I treated him for a long time, it did not heal."
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	"Then I pondered on some causes that might have an attractive force, and pulled out a bone from him, but after several days passed, he pulled out another bone; and I was very amazed because there are no bones in the belly."
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	"And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus."
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	"So I dressed the wound and removed many bones from it. The woman was then in good health and lived that way for a long time until one day she gave birth to a boy."
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	"And I do not affirm that this is strange, because in this there is knowledge and aid for the physician who works with his hand in treating."
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	"Regarding the shapes of the instruments necessary to extract the fetus."
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	"Form of treatment through which the main cause is opened:"
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	"This is the form of stretcher on which its ropes are tied, with two handles at both ends of each side."
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	"It is necessary that this handle be made more slender and tight, and made either of ivory or wood."
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	"And let the width of each beam be two fingers and a half, and the margin of each one on both sides be one finger wide, and the length of each one is one and a half palm; and in the middle place of two beams there are two joints of that meter wood which are already fixed, whose length is more than one and a half palm, and the width of each one is two fingers or a little more."
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	"And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the main cause so that it can be opened with those when you turn the two specified handles."
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	"Another similar form but more slender and lighter:"
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"It is made of ivory or wood in the shape of a forceps."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	"But nevertheless at the end of it there are two additions like these, and the length of those additions is two palms, and the width of each one is two fingers."
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	"And when you want to open the main cause with those, then place the woman on her back and lift the weights with your hands, opening what is between her thighs."
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"And then open your hand with the instrument like you do with pincers, grasping according to how much you want of the opening of the mouth of the main cause while the meter makes what you want."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	"The form of virtue which they say in the past:"
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	"The shape of pushing with which is pushed the deed:"
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	"The shape of embracing with which is held the large head"
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	"And it is similar to forceps whose teeth are at the end like this, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form whose teeth are like those of a saw with which it cuts and holds."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	"The shape of embracing little:"
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"The shape of a hook having one spine:"
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"The shape of a hook having two spines:"
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"The shape of pincers whose teeth close together with which the head of the deed is held."
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"The form of a spoon having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"The shape of two broad spoons:"
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"Nevertheless all those instruments are exercised, and the more numerous the species of it and the better prepared the craftsmen, the easier its operation and the better for people due to their quantity."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And do not work with those instruments whatever they may be, because the need for them is inexcusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"Regarding the extraction of the second cause:"
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	"When the second cause is retained during childbirth, then you should order the sick woman to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with a condition, and press your hand over its mouth and nostrils, and if it comes out through this, that's good."
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	"And if not, then take a cloth and make a hole in it, and place it over those herbs burned on the mouth of the main cause, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, saffron Arabic and lignum casia, and holy balm."
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	"All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the cloth, and place it on the fire."
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"And then place a reed cannula in the mouth of the main cause, and hold it there until the vapor comes to the concave part of the main cause."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second cause will be expelled with speed."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"But if even then this cure does not work and it is not expelled, then you should order the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in an emulsion of althea, and then insert it into the womb and search with that for the second cause. And when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the front of the main cause, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second cause, extract it slowly according to rectitude so that the main cause does not suffer from violent traction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"It is necessary that they be moved on the right and left sides with ease."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And also regulate the amount of traction so that it will obey and escape adhesions."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"And if the mouth of the main cause is obstructed, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and with medication of the cloth with herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself out in repeated attempts at extraction, but whatever comes out of her mouth should be placed on the thing of the woman, and then cauterize it with a salve and tetrafarmacon. For this will make it rotten right away and it will dissolve and be expelled."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it putrefies, it produces a bad odor in the head and stomach, and this harms the sick person. And then remedies should be administered by fumigation and whatever is suitable for that."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the Ancients already used fumigation with narcissus and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"Form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menses and second causes:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	"It should be made of brass or copper."
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	"And the subtle end should be placed in the womb and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed on the embers of the fire."
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"And hold it there until that fumigation is consumed, then repeat another one."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	"Regarding the cure of the unopened anus during childbirth:"
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	"Many children are born with their anuses not opened, which are thin and closed."
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	"So the midwife should perforate that ciphac with her finger. And if not, then perforate it with an acute spatula, being careful not to touch the nerve."
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	"And also place over that wool soaked in wine and oil. And also cure it with salve until it is healed."
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	"But if you fear that it is closed, then place a cannula in the hole for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	"And it has already happened that the anus became closed due to consolidation of a wound or an abscess. So then that consolidation should be incised and also cured with what we have said about cure and lead."
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	"Regarding the cure of fistulas that come from there:"
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	"The fistulas that originate at the lower part of the buttocks are usually large and thick, which originate near the anus outside or in the space between the two parts."
E es una fistula o motas.	"And it is one fistula or several."
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	"And with that thickness being old and running with moist white humors or thin putrefaction, and sometimes there are some penetrating parts of these fistulas."
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	"And those penetrating parts are known by what comes out of them through exit and windiness. And sometimes the illness itself is used for exit, and often worms come out of them."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	"And sometimes those fistulas have penetrating parts that go into the bladder and into the urethra. And those penetrating parts also go into the junction of the perineum and into the opening of the vagina."
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	"And what is known as a penetrating fistula that enters the anus and non-penetrating is this: you put your finger inside the anus, and carefully insert a thin probe of brass or iron into the fistula where there is not too much curvature."
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	"However, if there is tortuosity in that, then introduce into that narrow tent of lead or horsehair that you feel the tent or the hair on your finger."
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	"And if you do not feel anything with your finger and there is no evidence of obstruction, vomiting, or wind, as we have said, then you will know that it is non-penetrating, and you should cease treatment."
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	"And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or the meatus of the urethra, then its significance is urinary discharge from that and prohibition of it until the place is consolidated in medicine."
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	"But if it is penetrating into the junction of the hip or into the bone and accompanied by pain in the region, then its sign is that the tent has entered here if there is not tortuosity in the bone, and pain at the site of departure; and that afterwards there will always be putrefaction; and that nothing will help it, nor will it consolidate with ointment."
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	"And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure, and the cure of those is the labor and emptiness of the foolish physicians on which we put our faith."
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	"But in that one that is not penetrating and is not ancient, cure with iron is hoped for according to what I will recommend to you, and what I have already said."
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	"And it is that the illness goes between your thighs above its two sides and elevates its camber within itself, the hips are inclined towards its belly, and appropriately enters a lead or iron tent if there is tortuosity in the fistula, into which you should know where the tent has entered."
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	"And if that one feels the illness around the buttocks, then it is necessary for you to insert your index finger into the buttocks."
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	"If you feel the tentacle already inserted in your finger joint before the cut is opened, and if what you feel between your finger joint and that flesh is another thing, then know for certain that it has penetrated; and therefore do not work on that one, as it is not its function."
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	"However some say that it helps in some men's digestion."
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	"And of the treatment by which one hopes to be helped in this, it is that you burn cauterize subtly according to the width of the fistula, as is preceded, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the bone; and repeat it two or three times until you know that all those flesh that are fitted like a bird's feather quill have been scorched."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	"And also cure it with hot compresses wrapped in cloth until all those scorched flesh are healed, and then cure it with medicines that generate and strengthen the flesh, and if it is healed, good. And if not, then know for certain that it will never be healed by any other treatment."
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	"And if the tentacle enters and does not penetrate into the anus that you have said is in the buttocks, and between that and the tentacle which is a thin membrane of flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula follows along the surface of the backbone, then cut off the tail from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it cut with the tentacle inside it, and let it be in the fistula until the section reaches where the end of the tentacle has reached, and through that tentacle it is freed and cleansed."
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	"And also cleanse those flesh fitted like a bird's feather quill, which have not been injured by any means."
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	"But if blood flows during your procedure while you are operating on those flesh, then millet it immediately and use a light instrument to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for cauterizing with fire has two good habits: it is a scorching of those scorched flesh, and an incision of the blood and drying out of the humidity."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	"And also cure it with hot compresses wrapped in cloth or in three-folds until the place is healed, and then cure the wound with hard flesh-generating and strengthening medicine."
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	"And these are medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when they are applied, it is restored and healed and there will be no recurrence."
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	"But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is prolonged on the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and feel it with that."
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	"And then if you find the tentacle and between it and yourself there is only a thin membrane of skin or flesh, and it approaches penetration, then it is not an operation to be done on it, but rather by means of faith and hope."
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	"And this is to be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it out inside until you achieve the concavity through which it is possible to enter with the catgut and perform the cure described above; and do not proceed with a section so that you do not injure the lappet containing the anus, and thus incur the sin of injury without intent. And also cure it with what we have said because even if it is strong, it will be healed quickly. Or stretch out that membrane and cleanse that pus which dried it inside near to the anus as we have said, either with a tentacle or with another instrument with a sharp point, and also cleanse those flesh fitted in the section until they are covered; and then strive to restore all the wound with a suture, and if the opening above is not healed, and the fistula remains open at the beginning of the anus, it will be easier for the disease to occur."
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the tentacle into the fistula, and it appears on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the chain and at the edge of the anus, then take a tentacle with a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing hearts according to this form:"
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"and insert it into that hole wrapped in linen or around those; and also insert the tentacle with thread into the fistula until you achieve the concavity of it."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if it is penetrating into the edge of the anus close up, then pull out the thread from that track so that you can insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the extremity of the thread and tie both ends together, and stretch each one separately, and leave it like that for one day or two days. And when you see that the thread is cutting into the flesh, then cut away that until those flesh are incised which are between the two ends of the thread and release them."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And also cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then cause it to penetrate in whatever way you are prepared, but do not penetrate too far into the anus lest you injure the lappet. And also heal it with that until it is healed."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The form of the spatula with spines with which the fistula is opened: its curvature is very sharp and the other end is not sharp, for it should not injure anything that is not necessary, as sometimes happens."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those."
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: for some are between the buttocks resembling coal, or those which are with thick fat."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	"And of these some are small and large, and blood flows from them constantly and they are many, and they are outside the anus, and at the extremities of it."
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	"But those hemorrhoids that are outside the anus are according to few humidity, from which flows yellow water or a little blood with continuous flow, and they are according to the color of the body."
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	"And the cure for those that are inside the anus is to tell the patient to squat down and express until the anus opens up and the hemorrhoids appear."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	"Then you grasp them with forceps or hold them with your fingernail and also cut those off at their roots."
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	"But if the forceps are not held in those because of the humidity and softness of them, then grasp them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a wool bandage, extract those with your said fingers, and also cut those off and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on that wound to cauterize those instead; or cauterize those according to what is said in the chapter on cauterizing."
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And then cure them with another cure until they are healed."
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	"And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small biting cautery, and wash it with water that is in the anus so that it may easily evacuate when the patient strains."
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light and it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or with forceps, cut those off, and cure them with what we have said until they are healed."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"And he who makes an incision should administer sutures to them in this manner: take thread wrapped around and put it into a needle and also extract the hemorrhoids from their roots above, and make the thread penetrate with the needle into the root of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread on one side further away from the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid strongly with tension, and then tie the thread and remove the needle."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"And do this for all, except one, which you should not touch, so that the excess blood flows from that."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	"And first place a cloth dipped in rosemary oil or cerote on the back, and then place it on his buttocks, commanding him to remain still."
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then put that cloth inside a box, and when it is dried out, use those or another cure until he/she is healed."
De curacio de fistulas.	"Of the cure of fistulas."
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	"Many times this happens due to the dryness of the fissure or by nature's constriction."
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	"And when these are old and not useful in that medicine, then you should remove them with the point of a spatula or your nail until they are moistened, and wipe off the pus that is on top, which prevents consolidation. Then cure them until they are consolidated."
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"Now you should remove that very violent pus, first making sure not to wound and to scrape until they are healed."
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	"Of the cure of hemorrhoids, this is the key."
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"Know that hemorrhoids are like nails, and they are not red but of the color of the skin resembling a small nail head, and they are found throughout the body but more commonly in the parts below the hips and buttocks, and there pain is felt."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	"And then that which is in the circuit of the nail should be incised and held with forceps or a hook, and eradicated from its root. Then cure it."
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	"And if you wish, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in its chapter."
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	"But a verruca is a small, rough, fistulous elevation on the surface of the body, and many times they appear in the majority of children."
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	"And its cure is that you stretch and incise it, or remove it with a file or with tweezers until it is completely removed."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	"And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said."
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	"Already those verrucae and warts that are eradicated with the instrument that I shall describe to you."
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	"But a formica is a small, fatty or fistulous elevation on the surface of the body, commonly found on the forehead, and when it is touched it feels like the bite of an ant, and it appears around the body."
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	"And its cure is that you take a feather quill of a dove or an eagle feather, and it should be strong, and place it over the ant so that the circle of the quill contains it in its parts; then rotate your hand with the quill so as to incise what is around the ant, and press it on the flesh, and eradicate the ant from its root."
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, do this with a wax or iron cautery according to this method:"
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	"Let the end of the cautery be drawn out to a fine point, smooth (i.e. not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when it is placed on the said part, its application and rotation are facilitated."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	"And if you wish to cauterize the ant according to what has been said before in the chapter of cautery regarding the cauterization of warts."
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	"Regarding the shape of the instruments used for giving circumcision:"
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	"Sometimes circumcision is performed with silver or brass or melted wax or dough. And sometimes it is done with those instruments that are small and large according to the size of those for which they are used, because the one used in the cure of young children should be small; and those whose glans are short or retractile, their circumcisions should be small."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	"The form of a large and rare circumcision:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	"The head of the catheter at its upper end, where the foreskin is tied, should be wide in this manner; and it should be distinguished from where the foreskin is tied like this."
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"And the lower extremity of it, which is inserted into the glans, should be smooth (i.e. not open) and round, tapering to a fine point; and on one side of it there are two slits, and on the other side one slit, and the width of the slit should be according to the thickness of the glans and foreskin."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And let the bag in which the medicines of bladder or wool are placed be about a span long."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And it should be pierced with many slits so that as it rotates, the space between the slits is equal to the thickness of the finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And then insert into those slits a strong thread of raw flax, or envelope them with it, and attach the bag to it. And when the bag is placed on it, tighten it at the head of the catheter between two distinctions with a strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each slit: But the manner of cauterizing with it is that you fill the bag with warm medicine, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient; and take care that it is not too hot nor too cold."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And then the patient should lie on his back, raise his hips up, and place underneath him either cloth or linen. And then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; then insert it into the glans easily, and then the assistant takes the bag and squeezes it with both hands and presses it violently until everything that is in the catheter is evacuated into the bladder. And then remove the catheter and the patient raises his hips to the wall."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if the medicine forces him to urinate, let him hold back as much as he can. And if he sleeps with it all night long, it is more likely to be helpful."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you circumcise him in the case of diarrhea and frequent urination, then repeat the cautery until he is healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if there are hemorrhoids or painful abscesses in the glans, then use a small and round catheter like those with which children are circumcised."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"Regarding the treatment of plagues:"
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"I have already said in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for this book, and I say now the treatment of those with maimed limbs using medicine according to their condition."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"Therefore I say that plagues are differentiated according to how they are caused and according to the place where they occur."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes by which plagues often occur are such as penetration of a dart or incision with a scalpel or knife or blow with a lance or club or arrow or similar causes."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But the plagues that occur in the limbs of the body are such as plague that falls on the head, neck, foot, belly, thigh or similar ones on the members."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"And I am recounting the treatment of some plagues because this reasoning and rule applies to other plagues as well."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"And I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"Therefore I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to penetration by a dart or something similar, and only the scalp has been injured and it is a large wound, you fear that an abscess may form as a result of this illness. Then quickly perform cephalic phlebotomy and do not delay in doing so; and remove from him as much blood as the force of his strength allows, if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that comes out of the wound is little."
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"The lobotomy is the opposite of the plague's departure, keep the patient from drinking water or eating heavy foods."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"If you prohibit any cause during the miniaturization process, it would be reduced in size and not approach meat nor wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"And pause over the plague, if it happens to cause an aposteme (abscess), it is customary to cut it open and dress it with oil mixed with roasted rose or wine in which it becomes thicker/stoptical."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"But if you are sure of an abscess having formed, then pause over the plague (abscess), if it is fresh and its blood has not yet changed from that which caused it."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"And if the air has already changed from that, then pause over the inflamed ulcer until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	"But if the plague is large or caused by an incision of space and similar ones, and its lips are not properly closed due to dust, then adjust them with a suture according to what I will recommend for the stitching of the lips."
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	"But if the plague is already uncovered by bone and skin, and it is not retention of it but only a small suspension, then incise it and treat the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in place of sinew. Command the patient to be fed foods that are coarse: heads of cabbage and similar ones, until he/she is restored."
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	"And if you find putrefaction in the sinew and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is corrupt and remove it. Then treat it."
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	"But if in these plagues there is an artery or vein from which a flow of blood can come about, and it is not cut off by medicines, then inquire about the artery. If you find that it has not been incised, then incise it with a scalpel, or tie it. And if necessity prompts that what has been said does not work, then cauterize until the blood flow is stopped."
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	"And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is light. Therefore, powder them with this powder, so that it may solidify before the air changes them."
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	"And the manner of making the powder is as follows: Take one part oil of sesame, two parts dragon's blood resin, three parts myrrh resin; all well-ground and sifted. With this powder fill the ulcer, and bind it with a good binding so that it may adhere to it and coagulate with blood."
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	"And properly bind that above with powder and leave it alone. Do not remove it while it is still moist, so that the medicine does not lose its efficacy before it is healed."
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"And sometimes one may use cauterization alone when oil of sesame and dragon's blood resin are not available."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	"And this same procedure is done in large ulcers when it is convenient to pause upon them and bind them tightly, especially fresh ulcers with their blood, which the air has not yet altered."
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is summer time, then it is not suitable to apply this powder. In that case treat those ulcers with what has been said: pause upon them with some ointments made from digestives, or pause upon them with flour paste made with water and honey until they become dry; then treat them with the other cure until they are healed."
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	"But if a fracture of bone occurs in the ulcer, and it is small, then extract it with a gesture [i.e., manual manipulation]."
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	"And I say the cure for fractures of the head in what follows."
De las plaguas del col.	"On ulcers of the neck."
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	"But if an ulcer occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between that and a simple ulcer of the head."
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	"But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is nothing to do but avoid treatment with anything that causes violent contraction, such as vinegar and vitriol and similar things because they numb the nerves and contract them."
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	"And do not apply to the ulcer any hot thing, because the substance of nerves is hot and their continuity is with the brain, which is the chief part of all members."
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	"And if it is treated with light medicines, such as a clean wound washed with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and turpentine when washed with sweet water, and other minor stones according to this manner, and moist ointments."
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	"But if the ulcer is large, then apply stitches or draw together the lips of it and properly treat it with powder until it is healed."
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	"But if there is depth in the ulcer or some purulent matter has accumulated at its bottom, then pierce it with something pointed and depressed."
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	"But if an artery is incised in the ulcer and bleeding occurs, then separate it or dry it up, tie it off, or cauterize it if necessity requires it."
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the vertebrae of the nape or all are injured and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound over the spine of the nape with stitches and do not touch it. Then equalize it and reduce it to its natural figure, properly bind it with suitable strapping, leave it for a few days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	"But if the ulcer has already reached the bone, then percuss it. And if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the ulcer purges itself, separates and its inflammation is alleviated."
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	"And if the ulcer is fresh, then powder it with that powder which I have recommended to you."
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	"But if there is a fistula in the ulcer, then treat it with that of which the memory will come properly in its chapter."
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	"On ulcers of the neck or similar ones when they are between the shoulders and are made with a razor or with a scalpel or with a lance or similar."
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	"If it is a wound from a lance or scalpel and its depth is uncertain, then consider whether there is any wind in the ulcer when the patient breathes out. Then know that the ulcer is fatal."
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	"And if there is no depth and the ulcer is fresh with its own blood, then pause upon it with the first hour powder, and do not bind it tightly so that blood does not remain in its depth and return to the heart and worsen the illness. Rather, pause upon it with attractive ointment and wash it twice a day."
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	"And if the ointment is not at hand, then pause upon the ulcer with cotton wool so that it may suck up the humidity. And make the patient sleep on the ulcer so that what has been applied to it may run."
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	"But if three days or more have passed since the ulcer and there has been no spasm or cardiac tremor nor rigidity of breath in the patient, and other conditions are good, then know that the ulcer is safe; then treat it with linseed and other remedies until it heals."
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	"But if the healing of it is delayed and all time has passed, then know that a fistula has already formed. Therefore treat it according to its chapter."
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	"And if the ulcer is from an incision with a razor or scalpel and is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then treat it with what is mentioned for suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small."
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	If there has already been injury to the bone, and it is already incised, then twist the tweezers and gently attempt to extract those pieces if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them where they can be easily reached, as their extraction is facilitated that way.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other accidental wounds in the other members, the treatment in cure is what we have said
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the wounds of the belly
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The condition that occurs in the belly is either great, small, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Regarding large ones, sometimes the bowel or nerve of the bowel is seen, for which there must be intervention and suture of them to be more forceful and subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is done differently, and indeed it is often difficult to reduce them, unless you quickly intervene with their return to their proper place, because they open up and become swollen so that entry becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, just as it is difficult in both species mentioned above.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that suture of the belly is done in four ways, but two sutures are common and convenient for sutures of other wounds of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures are proper to other wounds, but they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recount each one with its exposition and explanation.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the bowel comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when inflammation has come to the bowel due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this is the case, then you should scrape it so that you immerse a sponge or moist cloth in hot water alone, or take some water with squinant, and cypripedium, and spikenard, and myrrh with which to moisten the bowel inside until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is good to use wine in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the bowel with water in which there is a lot of salt and mallows, because by this means entry becomes easier with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the entry of it is not facilitated by this cure, then cut open the disruption a little with an instrument with which you have made incisions.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better, when it is appropriate that it is not sectioning, and there is no need to cut open unless it is necessary and urgent.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, see its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	Sharpen one part of the knife acutely, and make the other part blunt; let its extremity be subtle but not too sharp-pointed.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore when the hernia has been pushed out and comes forth through the anus, it is necessary to reduce it again according to its natural form in its proper place if this can be done.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the rupture is wide and situated in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back and elevate their hips as much as their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should elevate the head and feet as high as possible.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly if the rupture is in one of the two sides of the belly, then always have your intention and attention directed towards that side where the hernia is located so that it may be elevated higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And this should also be done in both large and moderate hernias.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"In small plagues, pause what is prepared for you, and immediately make your servant be between your hands with his entire disruption held in one hand and adjust the lips of it."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	"This is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count needles according to the amount of the plague's width. Then leave from the extremity of the disruption of the said finger, and thread the needle once, but do not insert it in both extremities of the skin with two knots that remain outside the skin on both sides of the parted flesh, until you have made it penetrate one side; then you have joined both extremities of the skin and both extremities of the ciphac, and now make four stitches."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	"And again thread with double thread around the needle, and sometimes take both parts together, and then join both lips and the plague decently. Then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in it, and then tie it with thread like you did with the first needle; do not stop doing this if necessary until all the contraction of the plague is complete."
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And the needles should be between thickness and subtlety, for subtle needles hardly cut into the flesh, while thick ones are difficult to insert in the skin. Therefore they should be of medium thickness."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	"And it is not necessary that the needle should be inserted in both extremities of the skin too much, lest the flesh be lightly cut and the wound opens before its consolidation."
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	"And do not make the stitches too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing."
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	"And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not leave the wound open during sleep. Then press over the stitches powdered with a little of each herb, which will hold the extremities of the needles in place; and leave them until you know that the wound has healed."
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"And these kinds of stitches with needles are more suitable for small wounds, where one needle or two may be enough to close them."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"But the second stitch is common: it consists of bringing together with a single stitch all four extremities of the skin and both extremities of the cicatrix, using a needle with thread wound around it in subtlety and thickness."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And when the needle has passed through these four extremities, you will reduce it from that same side where you started, so that the thread draws back and brings the edges of the wound together in order to make a stitch like sewing with cloth, with which the edges are strengthened."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And pause between each stitch the thickness of the little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"And this stitch is known by men."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And with this stitch I closed a wound that had been caused by a knife to a man in his belly, which was about two palms long and wide. The disruption of the wound was more than one palm, and it had exited from the bowels around two palms near the middle of the member. And then I reduced that part where the bowel had been torn for 24 hours."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the wound was healed in the space of about fifteen days or so, and the man was cured. And he lived many years after that, and is still alive today."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by miracle he was healed, for I did not cure him with any ointment, because it was a place where no ointment nor any medicine could be applied. But I put cotton soaked in honey on the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with water of honey until it was healed."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"But I will tell you two kinds of stitches proper according to the narrative of the Word."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"And it is that you begin with a stitch on the skin edge, and insert the needle from without inwards."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	"And then, as the needle penetrates into the skin and through the length of the wound, leave the extremity of the cicatrix in which you inserted the needle; and make the needle pass through the other extremity from within outwards in the other extremity of the member."
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	"And then, when you have made it penetrate once more, now make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the member from without inwards; and leave the extremity of the cicatrix that is on this side, and make the needle pass through the other extremity from within outwards."
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	"And then, with that same penetration with which you made it penetrate into the cicatrix in the extremity of the member which is on the inside so that all may penetrate."
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	"And then begin from this same side and pass it with the extremity that is of the cicatrix on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the skin which has penetrated, and reduce it in that skin and attach the extremity of the cicatrix which is on the other side with this extremity of the member; and withdraw it from the skin which is on its part."
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	"And do this once or twice, and do it once again just as often until you close all that is without according to that example."
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	"And the sum of this manner of stitching is that you close with a skin stitch by which you close the skins, so that you close the cicatrix once from the side of the skin edge, and leave it open again until it has completed."
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	"But the second kind of proper stitching which you have especially taught by Galen, and this is of speech concerning it and recommended by him, is that you close it in such a way that certain physicians close it, namely, bringing together all parts to their corresponding parts by nature; and they apply the extremity of one part to the extremity of another part, and this is done according to what I have told you."
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	"That you leave the needle in the extremity of the member near the skin edge, and make it penetrate from without into the depth of that same place, leaving two extremities of the cicatrix; and then turn the needle round and make it penetrate again from without to within through both extremities of the cicatrix."
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	"And then turn those loops round, and make them penetrate from the depth outwards in two extremities of the member on the opposite side."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	"And this manner of stitching is better than common loose stitching, and it is the stitching of which I have previously spoken."
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	"This is the speech of Galen"
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	"And some say that stitching of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert in each a thread, and begin with needle insertion from where it is necessary for you to begin, and make it penetrate inwardly towards the other side according to stitching of those who close the veins by this method."
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	"And know that when a disruption is in the middle of the belly, then stitching of it is more difficult than that of other places on the belly."
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	"But judgment about treatment of wounds is judged by other wounds also."
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	"The reason for which is that when you close a fresh wound with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the bowel and close it and apply to it a suitable poultice, then you put dust upon that healing powder."
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And if the air has already altered the wound, then you put upon it some such things as are present which make a hard scar and join together the threads, and are consolidated cicatrix and member; and then cure it thus as is the curing of other wounds until it is healed."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	"However, if you are not present with the medicines, then pause over that immediately, for it begins to emit a strong odor twice daily. Thus, as you have taught me, between times when it is healed, you do not need another medication in many dispositions when the plague is simple."
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	"If you fear that the plague may communicate to lesions in the principal limbs, then it is necessary that you submerge lion's oil in oil of high quality, or olive oil, and place those on the circuits of the joints between the elbows and armpits."
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	"And if you feel pain or putrefaction in its bowels, for many times this occurs, then crystallize it with black treacle vinegar and even more so if the corruption has reached the bowel and it is difficult to penetrate into its concavity."
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	"And know that that which is of the large intestine is of easier healing than that which is in the subtle intestines."
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	"And it is difficult to heal that bowel which is called 'gegunu' because it does not receive healing from any plague that falls into it; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and its magnitude, and its subtlety, and its proximity to the nature of nerves."
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	"But if what proceeds from the plague is flesh, and you obtain that recently, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you also reduce the intestines equally."
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	"But if it has passed some time and it is already green or black, then strengthen it with faith on the spot that is darkened by it, so that blood fluxes may come, for in the flesh there are veins and arteries."
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	"And moreover incise that which is other than that limb, and pause at the ends of the thread hanging from the parts of the plague, so that over you may be relieved the attraction of it, you must cut off the skin and express the branch of the plague."
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	"Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the bowel."
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	"When there is disruption in the bowel and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some men, for example that one who was struck in his belly with a lance blow and the plague was on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and without fistula, and it had issue and wind."
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	"Therefore I followed the cure of him although it was not finished in the healing of it, but ceased to subtly examine that interior which had been healed and the place was consolidated."
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	"And I then saw that the place was already consolidated, so I spoke to him about the ailment that might occur because of the accident in his belly; and he did not become ill at all because of that accident, but remained in his usual dispositions eating and drinking, and indeed entered a bath and exercised himself in his sayings."
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	"And already some experienced ones say that when there is plague in the bowel and it is small, then it must be tied in this manner: take frogs with large mouths; and indeed adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those which has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague. Then when it takes hold on those and opens its mouth, cut off its head, for it adheres and is not dissolved."
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	"And moreover place another frog near the first one, and do not cease doing this with frogs according to the quantity of all the plague."
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	"And moreover reduce that and close the plague, and those attached heads will remain in the bowel interior when the bowel is healed, and it does not occur any harm to anyone."
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	"And already it is possible that the bowel may be tied with a subtle thread which is made from the bowel of an attached animal, because it is more like a needle; and take the end of these bowels, and let it be much cleaned, and indeed tie the end of it with thread of linen, wrapped, and moreover insert that thread in needles and sew with that bowel, and reduce it in the disruption."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	"And this manner of suture with frogs is only a way of trust and hope."
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	"But if the plague is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the small bowels, for then it is only a subtle examination, and not the healing of it altogether."
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	"About the cure of dropsy and fistula."
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	"Know that every plague and abscess when it opens and becomes old, and is not consolidated and gives off branch at all times and is not cut off, then in whatever member it may be, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it that ulcer."
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	"And according to truth, a fistula is a hard, thickened, white nodosity without pain and with a cavity like the cavity of the navel, for this reason it is called that ulcer which is wrinkled, that is, a navel."
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	"And in some men it is humid and gives off branch, and when the humidity is cut off within certain hours."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	"And sometimes this humidity is much, little, thick, and subtle."
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	"And I have already said before in the division when I spoke of plagues that every ulcer which is not healed or not on bare flesh is due to one of these causes: either because of lack of blood in the body, or its malice, or because between it and its lips there is hard cartilage prohibiting the birth of flesh, or because it is too large, or because it contains putrefaction and the matter that passes through it is of bad quality, or because medicine is unsuitable for its cure, or because corruption begins in the region and there is pestilence, or because of the property of the region as at Saragossa where difficult digestion of diseases occurs and there is delay in the healing of abscesses by nature, or because there are bones in it, one or many."
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	"I have already shown all those causes and their symptoms and the cure of them with medicines in the division."
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	"And it is proper that I should make you know the cure of fistula which is done by way of operation with a knife."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	"And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body because there are those which pertain to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the caecum, or the bowel, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to certain composite joints by composition like that of the hand and foot; and there are those which give nearness to the principal member and similar ones."
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	"And therefore those fistulas among these which are in this manner are of difficult healing and do not receive cure, and occupation with them is labor and ignorance."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	"And if there is among the fistulas one whose depth does not pertain to those places which have been mentioned and you hope and trust in its cure and want to come to knowledge of it, then take a probe of earth or iron, and if the fistula goes straight, examine it with that."
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	"But if the fistula is tortuous then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead because lead by its lightness is alleviated and bent according to its tortuousness."
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"And if the fistula has many horrific branches, then you cannot examine it with a probe."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	"Therefore dilate the horrific part by its horrific parts because the moisture with which you dilate that will go down towards the other horrific parts and their course."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	"Then inquire carefully, according to the manner you are able, whether here has been bone or nerve damage. Determine if this is a distant or nearby fistulous cavity, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings and lies beneath all of this with great force, upon which you must examine the patient's complaint with your full strength. With this examination comes the discovery of pain, which you should compress with your hand over the area."
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	"And when you have examined all those causes with true steadfastness, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: first consider whether it is an apparent fistulous opening near the skin surface or far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any other location you find."
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Then dry the fistula according to what is mentioned earlier about its nose, and remove that which comes from this filtration of rotting flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh or of the skin and similar things. And cure that wound so it may be healed."
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	"But if the fistula is of great depth and runs perpendicularly, then you must insert your finger into it as far as possible and carefully clean out all rotting flesh. Then apply compresses soaked in acrid medications and place them inside the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with forceps."
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	"And do this several times until the acrid medication has eaten away all the rotting matter in the cavity of the fistula."
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	"Then restore it with dressings that produce healthy flesh, until it is healed."
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	If it is not healed by this, then cauterize according to what we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If the cause of the fistula is bone and it needs to be certified, then you should explore that and dry it according to what we have recommended, provided that you do not harm any vein, nerve or main member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then remove that flesh within which the corruption has spread entirely; afterwards treat it with this medicine until it heals.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it does not heal and casts out flesh like before, then know that you have not yet reached the complete eradication of corruption; therefore uncover carefully and examine the cause of it and cleanse it with your last strong remedy, and afterwards restore it.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is healed, then good! But if not, know that the corruption is in the deep and remote parts of the body which you have not reached, and therefore you should leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small or can be extracted, then extract it using fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them and do not leave any cause untreated with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any difficulty in removing the cause due to humidity or flesh or sinews, and there is no fear of error in its incision, then incise those membranes or flesh if it is nearby, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not able to extract the bones at that time, then close over the wound with a dressing that will keep it moist. Leave that in place until that dressing is absorbed and the wound becomes consolidated and healed around those flesh and sinew-covered bones. Keep the dressing clean so that it does not become contaminated.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	When dressing the wound, if you fear infection, cover it with a dressing soaked in olive oil or Egyptian pitch or one of the green ointments, for when those membranes are dried out, they will separate from the bones and their attraction will be alleviated.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone, or one similar to them, and only the surface of that bone is corrupted, then scrape off that corruption with a curette until all the blackness and corruption have been removed, and then restore the dressing.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if a large portion of the bone is corrupted and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound and incise it at the location where the corruption has penetrated. Then treat it until it becomes consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that when operating on the thighbone of a man, you use this model and assistant for your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about 30 years old presented with pain in his thigh. Upon examination, it was found that the inflammation was on the inside of the thigh and had extended to the bone. There was a large abscess with no external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And so the time was prolonged with that patient due to the error of the physicians, who allowed the abscess to become hard. Much material had accumulated and its treatment was suspended until the thigh became fistulated. Then it was opened in many orifices from which pus and humidity of the body were discharged.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And so he consulted many doctors for about two years, but none of them knew how to treat it except me when I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the thigh of that man and the material that flowed from those orifices for a great distance. The whole body of that man was already emaciated, and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted a probe into one of those orifices and reached the bone with it.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then you examined all the orifices carefully and found that they originated from all parts of the thigh.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I took courage and incised one of those orifices until I discovered a portion of the bone. I scraped off that corrupted part, which was earthy, corrupt and discolored. And already a portion of the thigh had been corrupted, having penetrated into the muscle
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	Then I removed what was discovered and prepared from the bone that was uncovered
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And you should have seen that it was not in the bone but only that corruption which you could excise and remove, as I had already removed.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then he paused the dressing with a consolidation medicine for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I reopened and discovered over the bone again according to the first discovery, and scraped off continuous corruption from the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed what appeared to be that corruption, and yet you continued with the treatment and dressing of him, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then you discovered it again and did not cease incising the bone little by little particularly and continuing the dressing of him, but it was not restored until you incised about a palm's length, and then you extracted it with the marrow itself, and then you restored it with medicines, and it healed lightly and became consolidated.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	It was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of that thigh except for the disposition of his fearlessness and lack of tolerance, and his fear of death. For he was lazy in all hours due to excess evacuation and fainting badly.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Therefore, he healed completely, and there was nothing in place of hard bone and flesh. He had good posture in his body and regained his strength; he changed his ways and did not cause any harm or damage in any way during walking nor by any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in place of the flesh and causes pain, then you should cut it off in this manner: Take a strong thread and tie it at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it out. Then take another piece of thick thread and bind it over the first one. Then bind it over the flesh that is next to the bone, stretching the end of it so that you draw the flesh aside from those parts where you want to cut, and then uncover the flesh over the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a piece of wood or a board beneath the bone neatly, for when you do this, it prevents the saw from cutting into the corrupt flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	The sawing should be done little by little over the corrupt place, because if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and it does not appear in its appearance to the touch, it may be necessary to saw again later.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	But if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, then it means that one part is continuous with another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it. In this case, you should uncover all the flesh from every side; place wood beneath it, and saw off the first part where the corruption begins so that the sawing continues to the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	The sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint and saw off the bone where it continues with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	But if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in reason but by chance.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult. But you should investigate how the corruption appears to you and abrade it accordingly, cleaning it according to each position that is possible for you, so that with each operation, you rectify what you can without harming any vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"And you should know what are the incidors and saws used to cut these bones. They must be appropriate according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity; thus, you must prepare all kinds of tools suitable for that operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	"You should know that this operation involves the use of tools of which you stand in need; when your knowledge and experience in the ways of this art are great and long, and you have seen many cases of illness, then it is fitting for you to know what tools are convenient for each illness."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	"And now, at the end of this chapter, you will learn the number of instruments that you will use with ease to perform your prohibition, which you will experience on others."
Forma de serra:	Here are some common forms of saws used in medicine and their uses:
Forma de autra serra:	"Another method:"
Forma de autra serra:	"Another method:"
Forma de autra serra gran:	"Another method for a large hernia:"
Forma de ray:	"Method of Ray:"
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	"The head of this awl is shaped like a star-headed key, and its points are shaped like the points of a drill."
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	"And it is not necessary except that with this (instrument) the heads of the joints should be rubbed when they are spoiled, or if the mouth is too wide."
Forma de razori major dels autres:	"Form of a larger razor than the others:"
Forma de razori menor:	"Form of a smaller razor:"
Forma de razori lat:	"Form of a broad razor:"
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	"A well-made form for another saw: let it be made in the shape of a semicircle with sharp edges like a knife blade."
Forma de lu:	"What is its shape?"
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	"Form of razor with concavity:"
Forma de razori autra subtil:	"Form of another subtle razor:"
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	"Form of another razor with a curved end:"
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	"Form of small razor resembling a tent."
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	"The shape of the cutter used to cut bones:"
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	"Form of another smaller cutter:"
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	"Form of another cutter; this one resembles an awl and has a serrated end. It is used in many places for cutting bone fractures."
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	"The shape of the awl which is suitable for use on those who are pierced by bones:"
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	"And its end is triangular with a sharp point."
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	"And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly for all the cases that we have mentioned concerning razors, cutters, and saws."
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	"For cutting through extremities and for the serration of bones."
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	"Extremities can be injured due to intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If, after treating the corruption with medicinal remedies, there is no improvement in the condition, sometimes the corruption may spread to other parts without any apparent cause. In such cases, it becomes necessary to cut into that member at the point where the corruption has reached, so that the illness may subside and not result in death or harm, which would be a greater loss of the member."
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	"And the sign of someone in whom this has occurred is that the member becomes black where it was burned or scorched, or the blackness spreads to where the putrefaction entered that member which extends and takes over the entire body. Therefore, it is necessary to cut into that."
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	"And similarly, if corruption occurs due to the bite of some venomous creatures such as scorpions, marine animals, vipers, or similar ones."
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	"And if the corruption or bite is at the tip of the finger, then cut off the finger so that the corruption does not spread to the hand."
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	"And similarly, if it reaches the hand, then cut off the hand at the wrist joint so that the corruption does not spread to the arm."
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	"And if it affects that person, then cut off the arm at the elbow joint."
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	"And if corruption passes beyond that and sometimes reaches around the elbow joint, then death from this illness occurs. Administering any other cause for treatment at that stage is merely a matter of quantity of virtue."
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	"And similarly, when corruption affects the toe of the foot, then cut it off at one of the joints."
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	"And if it affects the ankle of the foot, then cut off the entire foot."
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	"But if it can go into the knee, then cut off the leg at the joint of the knee."
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	"But if corruption has already spread to the knee, then there is no remedy except for release, and let the illness take its course to death."
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	"The manner of cutting off the member or sawing it is that you stretch a bandage on the side where you want to cut, and another bandage over that place. And let the assistant extend one bandage to the sides below, and let him extend another bandage above. And you separate the flesh which is between the two bandages with a wide blade until all the flesh is exposed, and then it can be cut off or sawn."
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	"And it is necessary that linen cloths be placed on all sides to prevent infection from occurring, and that the wound be dressed properly with clean bandages."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	"But if bleeding occurs while working, then cauterize the place carefully, or apply some absorbent powders to stop the bleeding. And then return to your treatment until it is complete."
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then bind up the member with linen cloth in a convenient manner and care for it until it heals."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	"And I report to you something that happened to a man in his foot, which I and you are reporting here. This is the fourth case where blackness appeared on his foot with burning like fire."
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	"And this corruption occurred first on his toe and then spread throughout his entire foot."
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	"Therefore that man decided to cut off his foot because of the intensity of its corruption which caused him great pain and burning. So he cut off his foot at the ankle joint, and it healed."
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	"For a long time afterwards that same corruption appeared on the tip of his finger."
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	"And then it came upon me, and that surplus which I had placed on the hand of medicines, immediately returned to cleanse the body; but the surplus did not return, and it began to flow into the other finger before it even reached the hand."
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	"And he ordered me to cut his hand, but I did not want to do that hoping for the return of that surplus, and more so fearing the death of the patient, because the force of the disease was overwhelming."
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	"And after he left me, he returned to his land and I heard that the man was prepared and had cut off his whole hand, and he was healed."
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	"And I do not now narrate this story except to be helpful regarding what can be said about this illness, and that it may have meaning according to which it is interpreted and acted upon."
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	"De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis" can be translated as "On the treatment of diseases of the spleen and the quality of cleansing with medicines by enema". This phrase suggests that it is a medical text discussing the treatment of diseases related to the spleen, and the use of medicinal enemas in such treatments.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	"When an apostema occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the apostema is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place remains void as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it appears like finely woven cloth, and it has not reached ultimate corruption, and does not print on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called 'sinu', and it is not called fistula."
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	"But if the space is prolonged until corruption prints on some member, then it is called 'fistula' and not 'sinu'."
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	"And the treatment of it is that you cut away that skin entirely as it is turned back over itself, especially when it is thin and made like cloth, so that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption."
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	"But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that that corruption has not yet reached its ultimate conclusion, and there is some opening in the skin, then you treat it with an enema."
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	"And when you consider the sinu, if it is large and the arm that comes out has a fetid odor, then you administer an enema with the Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and vinegar and cinnamon received in equal parts, and they are ground together in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the consistency of honey."
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	"And then you take as much of that as is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and administer that enema to the sinu, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours."
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	"And then you remove that with a sponge; and do so for however many days are necessary until the sinu is cleansed and the corruption is removed."
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	"And sometimes an enema is administered with water of ashes when this medicine is not available; and you take the ash of vitriol, and place it on the water; and then cook that and administer that enema with it until you are assured that the sinu is now healed."
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	"And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then you administer an enema with warm water and honey mixed together with three parts cinnamon, and also administer it with wine and honey mixed together; for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinu adhere, especially when there is excess of astringency and dryness in the wine."
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	"And when you do this sometimes and you are assured that the sinu has been removed, then you administer an enema with that which causes flesh to grow in it."
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	"And when you take of the ointment called diafinicon and dissolve it with sweet oil and astringent wine; or whatever other medicines and ointments you administer that have properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments."
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	"And if the opening of the sinu is narrow and the cannula of the enema cannot be received, then you dilate it with a small iron gradually, and pause in it with a hot cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been dilated."
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	"And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you gather together its lips with a suture and leave in it the amount which enters between the enema without addition."
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	"And if the opening of that from which the arm emerges is elevated above its parts, then you dry it at its base where it enters into it so that the arm may run freely; for when the arm is restricted by the narrowness of the sinu, flesh can be generated there."
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	"And if it is not possible to dry the sinu at the entrance of the os near its base as you wish, then have the member prepared with such preparation that the arm may emerge from it lightly according to your desire and that there is in it no cause for the arm to be retained."
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	"And take medicines which are consolidative and suitable for the purpose that you wish, and apply those over a cloth of lint."
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	"And the cloth should be of such a size that it covers all of the sinu; and then you insert with forceps on the right side of the opening of the sinu a strip of linen a little wider than the opening of the sinu, and then you extend over another piece of linen some of the ointments mentioned above according to the size of the strip, and apply it over that for a distant position from the opening of the sinu so that the exit of the arm from it is alleviated, and do not leave the cloth on any longer than about three days once."
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	"But that which is over the opening of the sinu, you remove it at all times so that nothing may be adjusted to the arm."
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	"And in order that you may know whether that which emerges from the arm is much or little, or digested, or undigested:"
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	"And with this you also consider the place of that sinu, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess."
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	"And when your treatment has been prolonged in this manner and you see that the matter which is poured over the opening of the sinu adheres or approaches adhesion, then you remove it on the third day, and when you remove it, then change the cloth for another and renew the ointment."
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	"But if the sinu is far apart from space and there is subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is near; for some people in whom flesh is slowly generated in their wounds, and among them are those in whom it happens conversely."
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if from the sinu after many days an undigested arm emerges, then you know that the sinu does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinu is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you apply medicines which are drying, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, they are dry like diafinicon ointment when there is excess addition of sage."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	"And the last most effective thing with which it is treated is that you take diafinicon ointment and dissolve it in sweet oil, and mix it well with old wine in its substance, and then apply it over there and use it."
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	"And in that action, if there is no arm present, use diafinicon ointment mixed with honey, cooked until it thickens, or take myrrh and aloe wood and incense, triturate all of them and powder over the honey when it is hot on the fire, then line this over cloth and apply it over the sinu; and also line that with honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powder over cloth."
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	Sometimes a long and rough broth of heaven's lilies (and it is the lilies of heaven) and flour of barley and centaurea is administered, and use those simples or adjust them, sieve them and sift them and powder them over the honey which has been recommended.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, you will know that corruption has spread to the bone itself, and then you must investigate whether it has reached the joints or other hard parts or even ligaments. Then you should treat it with fistular cure, as described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the treatment of blisters and nails rubbed raw and cutting the tip of the finger added and sectioning.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	A blister is an abscess that appears beneath the nail of the thumb or another finger and grows more quickly on other fingers. If it is prolonged its treatment is more difficult, either it is an abscess from a cauterized abscess, or it is corrupt and throws out pus which corrodes the root of the nail, and often the whole of it becomes corrupted, and often its corruption reaches the bone within, which then has a foul odor, and the tip of the finger becomes blackened, and its color becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore, when you have that which has been said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then you must incise with iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail, and immediately cauterize the wound with it, for cautery is very useful in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the growths at the edges of the nail begin to compress the flesh within, and they start to pierce and cause pain there, then you must make a thin cut from the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh easily, and place over that which remains of the flesh medicines corrosive enough to remove everything; and immediately treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for there is no time when the bone can be healed if it is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the corrosion and corruption extend to the finger, then you must incise it at one of its joints according to how far it has spread, and immediately treat it until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail receives percussion or attrition and there is intense pain in that place, then at the beginning you must bleed the sore, and immediately dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, taking care that the section does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause intense pain to the sore, and it will be the cause of the formation of excess flesh in that place; and immediately treat that place with something that relieves pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But a finger that is swollen, which occurs in many men, is usually all flesh and very painful to the bone, or it may be very painful in the nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the formation is in some joints of these fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But that which is formed in some joints of the finger is not painful, but that which is formed at the joints is usually very painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And those that are born fleshy, the section is easy, and it should be incised there near its root with a wide spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But that which is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure; therefore beware of the amputation of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But that which is formed in the finger near the joints must be incised at the beginning with a round incision into the bone, and immediately saw it with one of those suitable saws for that, and immediately treat it until it is healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which occurs in these between their visible veins or by the nature of the person who is born that way, or by consolidation of phlegm or by burning with fire, or by similar causes, then you must dry that consolidation until those fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And immediately place between their bands of linen soaked in rose oil to prevent them from becoming consolidated lightly, and separate those, or place between those a thin sheet of lead so that they are consolidated according to what is necessary.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these with the palm, then you must dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incision of veins, there are two kinds:
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices such as varicose veins are caused by thick, engorged veins full of melancholic superfetations which occur more often in the legs, especially among those who travel, work hard or carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should administer a purge of the black bile from the body several times with strong expulsion, and also bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the treatment of varicose veins with iron is done in two ways: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other way is that the vein should be elevated and all of it extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The procedure is as follows: first, insert a sharp instrument at the beginning of the vein with cold water so that the thick blood may be resolved and liquefied. Then, tie off the unhealthy part of the vein below the swelling using a bandage, and then cut the vein open wide in one or two or three places. Next, elevate the black blood from the vein at the upper end of the unhealthy part, using a tube, and draw out as much blood as desired, repeating this process several times until the vein is emptied of its harmful properties.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then ligature that vein, and command the patient to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are filled again and it is necessary for the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of varicose veins is done in this way: first, remove any bandages from the affected area and then have the patient bathe and insert cold water into the vein until it becomes reddened and the veins are dilated. Alternatively, you may exercise the limb vigorously if bathing is not available, until the member becomes fatigued.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the cord in the direction of the vein on the right side at its length or at its end above the knee joint, or below it at the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then tie off the cord with a ligature and strip away the vein from all around it until it appears at the surface of the skin. This should be done while the vein is still pulsating, because sometimes it becomes dark-colored after being tied off.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Then carefully remove the ligature and tie again with a white thread that is strong enough to hold together.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then place some lint there until it becomes elevated and freed from the ligature, and suspend it with a linen bandage.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another section near that section three days later, and strip away the vein from its attachment above it until it becomes visible.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that again and incise it in another section below the ankle, and then extract it from that section until it is emptied by the second section, and also extract it from the section that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you have extracted all of it from the section that is above or below all the sections, so that everything is emptied. Then stitch it closed.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you are unable to extract and elevate the vein completely, then insert a strong doubled thread needle into it and ligate it and remove it. Otherwise, place some lint there and roll your hand around it until it is expelled.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut into the vein, because if it breaks, it will become difficult to elevate and will cause harm to the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when all of it has been removed, then apply to the wound a dressing made of wool soaked in rose oil and unguent roseum. Cover this with another dressing and let it heal.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted in such a way that it has no straightness to it according to what we have said, then you must make incisions along all of its tortuous parts and at the points where it is adhered. Then suspend it with ligatures until you have elevated it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful when making your incision that you do not cut into the vein or damage it, because it will then be difficult to elevate. Use caution and skill in this procedure.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the Incision with which a Vein is Cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a Ligature:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	"It is not sharp like needles and does not have a pointed tip so it will not pierce the vein. It has thick flexibility like that of a lion. If it were thin, it would cut through the vein due to its fineness."
De extraccio venae cruris.	"Removal of a leg vein."
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	"This vein is found in the calves of the legs, especially in hot lands like those inhabited by Arabs and in dry, arid lands with little tenderness where neither grass nor herbs grow."
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	"And it is also generated in other places on the body besides the calves."
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	"And its movement is one of putrefaction that extends from the spine like venom, coming from within the body, causing serents and worms to appear between the spine and the flesh."
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	"And a sign of the onset of this condition is inflammation in the calf, with swelling at that location. The vein begins to emerge from the site of that swelling, appearing like a plant root."
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	"And then when the vein appears at its end, you should take a piece of lead weighing as much as two dragons [an ancient unit of weight] and tie it around that area. Leave the lead hanging from the calf."
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	"And whenever it happens that some cause appears outside it, cover that with lead and leave it tied in place."
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	If the condition persists, then cut off a part of it and wrap up the remaining; do not cut that which has not yet come out, for if you cut that, it will constrict and enter the flesh causing an abscess and putrefaction in the area leading to bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	It is necessary that it should be treated slowly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the body and no remnant of it remains in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And some men have told me that this vein is as long as 20 fingers, and I have even heard that one man has had it as long as 30 fingers.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut at the time of its treatment, then insert a probe into its track and pierce that with a long probe through the body until all liquid is evacuated from the matter, and apply putrefactive medicines to the area for several days; and afterwards treat it as you would treat an abscess.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the leg or in the leg itself, and it comes out with many openings; it is said that there are almost as many branches as openings.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so treat it thus as we have said in its division, along with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the section of worms generated under the skin, also called bovine disease
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called in some lands the bovine disease because it often affects cattle and there are many worms that are born between the skin and the flesh, which crawl throughout the body and cause swelling of member after member until they break through the skin and come out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to putrefaction of some humors, just like the occurrence of worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared because of its harmfulness, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, then it often enters the brain and causes damage to it, and this happens very often.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you wish to treat it and remove it, first find out its path and appearance through the senses, then take what is on top of it and what is below it with pressure and constriction, and then dry it off and pull it out.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you cannot grasp it, then apply a cautery with fire to the spot where it resides, for its greatest danger is corruption of that area, as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if it has reached the head near the brain, then press over the eyebrow with strong pressure and dry out that area, and remove it; and the patient should use medicines to cleanse their body of putrid, harmful humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the section regarding the disease known as "nafir"
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes on suddenly in certain members of the body, and then changes from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And now I will tell you about it as I have promised you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to see a woman who was ill in a village, and when I examined her arm, I saw a small inflammation on the vein of the arm. And after about an hour, I saw that inflammation move just as if it were a living worm crawling along, but more softly than it should have been, like molten silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then the pain went away from that spot and appeared in the muscle nearby, and then it remained there for about an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved to the other side of the body and reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And she told me that it was moving throughout her body, as I had seen. And she was greatly amazed by its changes and the speed with which it moved from member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something like this in my own hands before, but I have not seen many people who can grasp the pain as it moves from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see it so clearly with my hands as in this woman's case.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think it was anything but this because the woman was old, with dry skin and visible veins, and in this appearance to the senses there was that movable windiness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear according to its course in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with concealed veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And when you wish to treat it and the patient feels that pain, then do not grasp it with your hand as we have said, but press on it lightly and dry out that area where that blocked windiness has come out, and apply a cautery to that spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you cannot grasp it with your hands, then treat it by purging the body and using medicines that expel windiness. And apply plasters made from foul-smelling herbs and those containing serpentaria and similar substances.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the extraction of arrows
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are various in their species and also vary according to the parts of the body where they strike. For there is great diversity among them: some have large points, others small ones, concave or blunt points; some are solid. Some have three angles, others have tongues, while still others are star-shaped.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those that strike the limbs and other parts of the body are of two kinds: those that strike principal limbs or organs, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar ones. And when one of these members is struck by an arrow and signs of death appear, which I will tell you about shortly, then it is necessary to avoid extracting that arrow in cases where death is imminent due to the patient's constitution. But if those signs do not appear and the arrow is not deeply embedded in the member, then extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of an arrow striking the brain are: when it pierces the bone and comes out through the fontanelle, which is on top of the brain. This happens due to sudden violence, leading to blindness (scotomia), dizziness (vertigo), redness in the hands, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting bile, and severe difficulty speaking or loss of voice. And there is an exit point for white, powdery fluid like milk from the wound site, and it resembles the moisture of flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if these signs appear, then refrain from treating or attempting to extract the arrow, unless it is external.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of an arrow striking the heart are: it is near the left nipple, and there is pain where it has been driven into hard flesh, not soft. The movement of the arrow feels like a pulse, and black blood flows from the wound. There is sudden coldness in the extremities, followed by sweating and fainting; therefore, know that death will come suddenly without delay.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when an arrow has struck the lung are: frothy sputum of blood coming from the wound, and the vessels near the collarbone become congested. The patient's complexion changes, and they exhale with great force or pant for breath, demanding cool air to breathe.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow strikes the pleura (the lining of the chest), then pain will be felt near the lower ribs. There is great difficulty in breathing with violent pain and sighing, and all the members are affected by muscle weakness.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	"And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then swiftly remove from it any undigested food."
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	"And if the arrow enters the belly and remains stuck there, then some rent of the skin, or the flesh, or bowel may be torn; and there is little hope for recovery through the extraction of the arrow."
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	"And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is passed outside, and there is pain in the external parts, then you know that it is fatal."
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	"But other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, spine, collarbone, hip, knee and their corresponding limbs are saved according to the best practices when the arrow does not strike a vein or an artery and is not poisonous."
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	"And I will tell you what I have seen about these arrows, so that you may know how to treat them."
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	"It happened that an arrow entered the tear duct of a man's eye and I extracted it from the other side through his nostril, leaving behind the feather of the arrow in his ear, and he was healed without any harm to his eye."
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	"And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had entered his eye through the upper eyelid, leaving behind the eyelid and extracting only a small part of it with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large pointed arrow of the Turks with a lion's head on it without feathers."
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	"And the Jew was healed and suffered no harm to his eye."
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	"And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had entered his throat, and it was an Arabic arrow with feathers on it. And then I incised over that between two guides and it was already submerged in the man's throat. And then I carefully extracted it and the Christian was healed."
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	"And I extracted another arrow from a man which had entered his belly and I thought that he would die because of it. And since thirty days had passed and there was no change in him due to its condition, I incised over the arrow and extracted it, and he was healed without suffering any great harm."
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	"And I saw a man in whom an arrow had entered his back and the wound had healed over it. And because it was about seventy years old, I extracted the arrow through the opening of the wound."
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	"And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had entered her belly and the wound had healed over inside her without any change in her condition. And the woman suffered no harm to any of her natural functions."
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had entered his face and the wound was healed over it. And he broke off the arrow without suffering much pain, and appeared to be very brave."
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	"And I extracted the arrow from the nose of one of the king's princes which had entered into the middle of his nose and had already inclined slightly to the right. And the whole arrow was hidden."
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	"And I was called for his cure about three days after the arrow had entered him."
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	"And then I opened the wound of the arrow very tightly. And then I carefully probed it with my finger and did not feel anything; but he felt a pricking from behind the right ear. And then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow."
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	"And I widened the opening with an ointment in which there is attractive and digestive virtue. By doing this, I knew that the place would be opened so that it would appear to me the place of the arrow and I could cut on it."
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	"And there was no significant injury where the arrow had reached that place. And I continued to apply the ointment on it for many days without causing any harm, and meanwhile the wound healed up and the swelling from the extraction of it went down over many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized this before me."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	"And then I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up. And with my finger I felt that and extracted the tip of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft."
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	"And precisely I applied that corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until I saw the tip of the arrow visible. And it took me about four months' time with this."
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	"And precisely when the wound was enlarged and I could insert the forceps into it, but it remained stuck and did not come out easily, then I continued subtly to pull and manipulate on it with various methods of extraction until one day I began to pull it out with forceps made for this purpose, according to what is described at the end of the chapter. And precisely I restored that wound."
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	"And some physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored. But I restored it and the wound healed up completely, and the illness was healed entirely without any remaining cause."
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	"And I recount to you the details of extracting some arrows because you should pause and consider this rule and meaning about what I have not said, since the parts of this art and its definitions are not understood by narration alone, nor is that book comprehended."
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	"And the skilled artisan says little about many things; and about what is present, he compares it to what is absent. And he achieves new operations and new instruments depending on the removal of foreign causes of the art when they occur."
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	"And therefore I say that arrows are not expelled from the limbs into which they have entered except by two ways: either by attraction of the place where it has gone in, or by the opposite direction of its path."
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	"And that which is expelled by the place through which it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in a fleshy location, and is attracted and expelled."
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	"And if it does not come out at the time when it was shot, then you should let it be for some days until the flesh around it becomes softened, and its attraction and exit may be facilitated."
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	"Similarly, if it is stuck in bone and does not come out easily, then let it be for some days and repeat the attraction and movement each day until it is finally expelled."
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	"If it still does not come out even after some days, then you should bore into the bone around the arrow with a subtle awl so that the place may be enlarged by the arrow and thus you can extract it."
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	"If the arrow is stuck in one of the bones of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain and some of those accidents appear which I have mentioned above, then abstain from extracting the arrow and let it be until his state is equalized for some days; because if the arrow reaches the cerebellum, death will not be prolonged."
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	"If the arrow is stuck only in the flesh of the bone and does not pass into the brain cavity, and the illness remains for some days without any cause from those accidents, then you should endeavor to attract the arrow and attract it."
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is deeply embedded and does not come out easily, then you should administer awls around the arrow as we have recommended, and thus cure the place until it is healed."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	"But if the arrow is already hidden in the location of the heart and is hidden from sensation, then you should seek it with a probe, and if you find it, then attract it with some instruments which are suitable for its attraction."
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	"If the patient's wound is too narrow and deep to operate on directly, and there are no bones or major blood vessels or nerves in the way, then open up the wound further until it is wide enough for the arrow to be safely removed."
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	"If one of the patient's ears is injured and needs to be removed, then carefully cut through all the flesh in which it is embedded using all the skill you can muster. Use all your ingenuity if you cannot remove the ear due to its fracture or torsion."
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	"When extracting the arrowhead from any location, use gentle twisting with your hand and forceps in all parts until you can grasp it. Use extreme care to ensure that the arrowhead is not broken and is easily extracted."
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	"If you cannot extract the arrowhead at that time, then leave it in place for a few days until the surrounding tissues have had a chance to heal. Then try again when the patient is feeling better."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	"If bleeding becomes profuse during surgery, then follow the procedures for treatment of hemorrhage as described in the chapter on wounds and injuries."
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	"And be careful when incising veins, nerves, or tendons. Use all your skill and care to extract the arrow smoothly and calmly, without hurry or hesitation, as I have instructed you."
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	"And once the arrowhead has been extracted, contract it to its original shape according to the figure indicated on the casing of the arrow. This is more helpful."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	"But if this is not possible, then do whatever you can based on the figures available."
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	"But when removing arrows that have been shot from behind, or when there is no wound channel present, or if the arrow has pierced through to the exterior of the body, feel along the path of the wound above the rib cage until you find the emerging point. Then grasp it with forceps according to its size and pull it out gently."
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	"But if the arrow is stuck in bone, then twist it gently in the opposite direction until you feel the arrowhead give way. Then push it further in and extract it."
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	"And if this does not work, leave the arrow in place for a few days to allow the surrounding tissues to heal, then try again when they have recovered."
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	"And if the shaft of the arrow is still inside, then push it further in with it."
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	"But if the shaft has broken off and you wish to apply traction, then insert a probe into the wound cavity and find the tip of the arrowhead. Then place it in the concave end of the probe and gently pull it out with the probe."
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	"But if the arrowhead is barbed or has a broad head, then forcefully insert an instrument into the wound cavity to push it back in, for such arrows are easier to extract this way."
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	"And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to excise all the flesh around the wound, if possible, and then treat the wound as appropriate."
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And if the arrow has struck bone, or entered the abdomen, bladder, or chest cavity and is close to vital organs so that you can touch it with your hand, then carefully grasp the arrowhead with forceps without injuring veins or nerves, extract it gently, and suture the wound if necessary. Then treat the wound until it heals."
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	"Method of extracting arrows using forceps:"
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	"Limbs like bird beaks seize arrows in such a way as not to let them go."
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	"Their grasp varies greatly: some arrows are seized firmly, others loosely, depending on the size of the arrowhead and its narrowness, as well as the width of the bowstring and the tension on it."
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	"Shape this concave end like a bird's feather to ease the insertion of the arrowhead and strengthen its force."
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Translate the sentence into English.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	As rays pass through it, may it alleviate the pain within him in the hollow of his side.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy which are most commonly opened are 30, among which there are those in the head numbered XVI, namely two pulsating veins near the ears called "temporal"; two veins located in the temples appearing like herbs; and two veins located at the corners of the eyes called "canthi". There is also a vein prepared in the middle place of the forehead, and one which is at the end of the nose. Then there are two on the neck, and two veins on the upper lip, and two veins on the lower lip; and these are those called "angle" [veins]; and finally two veins behind the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	In the arms, five veins are commonly opened for phlebotomy: among these there is one cephalic vein which runs along the wild side of the arm; the people call it "the vein of the head". There is also a median vein called "sorda" composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic. The basilica is a vein placed on the inner side of the arm, called "cubitalis", which the common folk call "the vein of the belly". The funis of the arm rests upon the elbow joint and this is the vein commonly opened for phlebotomy. It appears above the pulse in a manifest way. The salvation vein is that which lies between the aforementioned auricular and the little finger; it has two branches.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these lies on the outer side of the ankle joint on the wild side of the leg, another is the saphenous vein located behind the knee joint on the inner side of the leg. The third is the sciatic vein located behind the knee joint on the outer side of the leg. There are also other veins in the leg which resemble these.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The benefit of opening the veins near the ears is for treating ancient head colds, headaches, migraines and ulcers of the head from ancient times.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of letting blood from those veins is as follows: it should be done after removing the hair from the sick person's head. The head should be anointed with oil in the occipital region where both veins are located, using a wide cloth and good friction. Then tie the sick person's shirt tightly around their neck with a bandage so that both openings appear near the ears on two slightly elevated points of the head. Take hold of those with your index finger and if you feel the pulse there with your own finger, then proceed with caution.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Approach thou taketh the lancet scalpel, which is sharp-pointed, and thou insert it beneath the vein in the elbow until the phlebotomy comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then lift up thy hand with the vein and the elbow above and cut through the vein with an incising incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers or thereabouts, and cause as much blood to flow out as thou wishest.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply powder and bandage it so that it may heal.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	As was stated at the beginning of this book, some wounds are incised and cauterized.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	Most of the two veins called arterial are to the temple, the help of phlebotomy is in ancient migraine and evil humors and frequent ophthalmia and sharp pains from excess fluid accumulated in the chest.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing them is according to what I recommend to you: constrain the illness with a vein in such a way that both veins appear clearly under the skin and show their pulse, and then proceed gently.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then lift up the elbow above the vein at its beginning with your little finger, insert the phlebotomy lancet into it, and raise up the vein thus; and incise it just as you did in the other two veins, and cause blood to flow according to your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then release the constriction of the illness, and place your finger over the vein for an hour, then place cotton and powder and strengthen it above with a tight bandage, and leave it alone until it is healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	As was mentioned before in the beginning of this book, the memory of these veins, their incisions, and their attraction.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And thus the help of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is especially useful for the cephalic veins in ancient illnesses of the face and migraine and rigor and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of phlebotomy of it is according to what I recommend to you: thus, the illness should be strengthened with a bandage so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called "fossor", the form of which is this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place your finger on the prominent point that is at the head of the vein and strike it with a pestle or another tool in the manner you desire, allowing blood to flow according to the quantity you wish; then immediately relieve the patient's perforation and strengthen that area so it may heal.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with a flebotomy knife, however it is not necessary that the flebotomy knife have an acute tip like other flebotomy knives, as long as its side edge is sharp; and thus open it crosswise, for the bone is close by and might break the flebotomy knife if it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the benefit of these two veins that are near the lacrimal canals of both eyes is for the itching of the eyes due to heat and sebaceous matter in the eyes, and for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bloodletting is that after the patient has strengthened their neck with a bandage, then perform the bloodletting, and you should be standing on the head of the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And perform the bloodletting crosswise along the length of a little bit with a blunt flebotomy knife, for there is not much flesh in that location; and if the flebotomy knife is thin, its tip will break easily.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then make the blood flow as much as you need, and pause on that spot, and strengthen it for one night with a bandage, and then remove the bandage.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But bloodletting from the vein of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and sudden sneezing, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and heat that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient strengthens their neck and then places their nose in your left hand, and take a thin flebotomy knife that is long and place it in the middle of the head of the nose straightly, for the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Be careful to gradually withdraw your hand with the flebotomy knife and make the blood flow according to your necessity; and then bind it for one night, for that wound heals easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the benefit of bloodletting from both carotids is for the cure of dropsy and the beginning of leprosy, and for many illnesses and impotence and malignant ulcerations that are like herpes zoster.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting from there is that each patient strengthen themselves on their neck with a bandage; and the operator stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then bloodlet the vein along its length with an ample flebotomy knife little by little; and then remove blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what you estimate is necessary; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then remove the bandage and strengthen both veins with a middle ligature so that the patient is not fainted, and leave them like that until morning for the wound to be healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the veins of the arms is for small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and malignant ulcerations and fissures, and for malignant ulcerations that are in the nose and around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting from there is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and strengthen their neck with a bandage, and then turn their lips and observe both veins of which one is on the right lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by its darkness, and more so because in the circuit of those there are small dark veins; and then cut each with an incisive incision.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if there is doubt about which one it is, and you do not know which one it is, then you can make an incision in the largest of those, and from the manifest pus of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do the same for both veins that are in the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more customary to cut both veins that are on the left lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"Of the two veins that are left of the tongue, it is appropriate for phlebotomy to be performed on the cephalic vein at the forehead, and on the malady of the uvula, and maladies of the mouth."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the quality of phlebotomy to be performed is that which follows the malady between their hands in front of the sun, raises the tongue of them, and watches left of the tongue, one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declines towards blackness."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then phlebotomize each one; but be careful not to end your hand in phlebotomy of those who have arteries left."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the phlebotomy of them is done according to two methods: either they put with the flebotomy lancet mirtle or olive oil of subtle inclination; or they cut with flebotomy knife, and call if necessary, and this is the form of it:"
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"And this alnessil (tourniquet) is that which is appropriate for section, and of those are special sides and subtle according to the width of the veins and according to the narrowness of those."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"Form of phlebotomy lancet with mirtle:"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"Let the side of it be like this: when veins are full and convex, it is appropriate to open them with an apparent large incision, and those that contain thick and turbid blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	"And this is the form of phlebotomy olive:"
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"And this flebotomy is of lesser width and more subtle point, and it is appropriate for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain subtle citrine blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy of the basilic vein which is one of three veins, is that it extracts blood from illnesses that are on the left side and neck, and from those that affect the feet and belly."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that one, to guard well that one and be cautious about it, because there is an artery left of it; if he errs in adjusting the puncture of the flebotomy needle, he will cut into that artery and cause blood flow; therefore it is not appropriate to phlebotomize that with a puncturing flebotomy lancet, but rather cutting without tourniquet."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilic vein does not appear by manifest appearance, then you should leave that one and move to another, or seek some of its branches; or you can phlebotomize in place of it at the end of the arm where it is manifest; and cut it with flebotomy tourniquet as we have said."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	"But if you want phlebotomy of the median vein, then before the narrowness of the arm where you touch the place within that you know the pulse's place, and press firmly with your thumb on it; and raise the arm and cut the vein with concave incision with flebotomy tourniquet as we have said; and guard against hitting the artery by some space in the place."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	"And when you compress with strength the limb, if swelling occurs in the place that you have pressed with your thumb, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, therefore avoid it."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	"And if blood flows in the phlebotomy like urine of a child, and the blood is thin red, then you know that it is blood from the artery; then you stop and pause your finger on that for some distance; and then remove your finger, and if the blood stops, because many times it stops, then you compress the arm and leave that one."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	"And guard against the wound of the incision, and be careful with it and do not move it for some days until it is healed."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	"But if the blood does not stop flowing, and you see that there is no remedy for it, then you have cut into the artery; because the point of it is contracted, and the blood has stopped; therefore take some lint and fill that one, and press a linen bandage over the place of the vein with narrowing descent with limb and powders within another day."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	"And then if the blood stops flowing, good. And if not, then cure it with that which has been mentioned before for stopping flow of blood."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	"And the cessation of blood flow from it is difficult in many dispositions because of the smallness of the vein and the possibility of movement of the arm."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"But regarding the black vein, phlebotomy is beneficial for removing blood from the upper part of the head and from the left side of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and branches of the cephalic, as we have said."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	"And the phlebotomist should be careful in phlebotomy of that one because left of it is a nerve; therefore if he errs in adjusting the puncture of the flebotomy needle and touches the nerve, numbness will occur, and healing will be difficult, and sometimes it is not healed completely. And this nerve often appears at the sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is thin and does not show up, then you should pause the flebotomy needle with which you phlebotomize with tourniquet incision, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	"Bleeding from the temple vein offers relief by drawing blood from the head, thereby alleviating headaches."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	"Do you wish the phlebotomy to be performed with an olive-shaped lancet or a myrtle-shaped lancet? For it is safer than all other veins, as neither artery nor nerve is left behind."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	"But you must ensure that the phlebotomy does not merely puncture the lizard's head and that you seek out the most suitable location. Do not strike it too hard if it is not immediately affected by the initial percussion, as some attempts may be necessary for a successful phlebotomy."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	"But even if a boil forms in some people after the first attempt at phlebotomy, do not strike it again."
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	"However, the quality of that phlebotomy and its complications are matters that require your consideration for their correction."
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	"The first [consideration] is that you should know that phlebotomy should only be administered for the conservation of health and with hope and caution of avoiding illnesses, and that it should be performed on one of the veins in the elbow area, such as the cephalic, basilic, or median cubital vein; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting during spring and autumn, and around mealtime during winter, when signs ofpletion appear."
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"And phlebotomy should be performed either on the third day or at least one hour after breakfast."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	"However, phlebotomy should be performed whenever it is deemed convenient and necessary, whether during the night or day, at any hour and at any time."
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	"And children should not be phlebotomized until they are at least 14 years old; pregnant women should only be phlebotomized from the fourth to the seventh month; and elderly people who have already surpassed their sixtieth year of life should not be phlebotomized."
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	"And when someone wishes to be phlebotomized for any reason whatsoever, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's-claw purgative; if there is much retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities during the phlebotomy of the purified intestines, which would harm the principal members."
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	"And patients with sacred sickness and drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until they have recovered from their illness or sobriety. And phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain, vomiting, and stomachache; and during multiplication of coitus, work, and exercise after fasting or vigils, or any cause that weakens the body or soul."
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	"And it is important to consider the subtleties of humors beforehand if the blood is thick; with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible."
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	"And it is appropriate to take a bath beforehand if nothing prohibits it, or rather if one has been exercised for the sake that blood may be subtilized."
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And pause the phlebotomy before noon, especially around the hour of Terce, as we have said."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	"And continue only if that part is protected from all animal accidents such as distress, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents such as work, excessive exertion, coitus, and similar things."
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"And at his seat, let there be present the causes used in the usual practice of men with aromatics and fragrances and balms and similar things according to their quantity."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	"And let the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the person who is to be phlebotomized."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	"And let him first extract his arm and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; then let him strengthen the limb with a bandage and wrap it twice."
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	"And let the bandage be tied moderately, for if it is not equitable or if it is with superfluity, then it hinders the flow of blood; or if it is too loose, it hinders the course of blood entirely."
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	"And after tying off the bandage, let the person to be phlebotomized rub his hands together until the veins are engorged and clearly felt."
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	"And let the phlebotomist anoint his lancet with a little old oil specifically; then pause his left index finger on that vein where he wishes to perform the phlebotomy so that the vein may swell slightly and he may feel which vein he should pierce for blood flows from veins like strings under the skin, and it is also important to avoid those veins that are full of windiness because when one presses the lancet upon them they contract beneath the lancet."
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	"Therefore, let the phlebotomist be firm and attentive to all these causes."
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	"And then pause the lancet if the vein is filled in one stroke, that is good. But if not, repeat this another time nearby there or on it with haste if the location is not inflamed."
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	"And if the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then let it be left alone for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, because that would draw out an ulcer. Nor should one take a bath."
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	"And repeat the phlebotomy if necessary."
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	"And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out, then repeat the lancet in that same furrow according to correctness and adjust the aperture slightly, but do this quickly before the location becomes inflamed because many people become inflamed with a small opening."
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	"But if the location is already inflamed, then do not repeat upon it because that will serve no purpose. Rather, pause on some part of the oil furrow for that alleviates the course of blood."
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	"And it is better in this location to use oil than any other oils."
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	"Similarly, administer an oil furrow in all phlebotomies where veins are pierced with the prohibition of blood flow, and they do this with Tyriaca Alfadoc and Sagzenea when pausing on one of those over the location because blood is subtilized and revolved when it is thick."
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	"And if a large ulcer is generated in the location of phlebotomy because many times this happens, especially to those who have not been bled for that day or whose vein opening was small, then coitus and pause upon the location with a sponge infused in water and salt slightly scalded, and tighten it there for an hour because it will be dissolved."
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	"And this should be done immediately after the letting of blood from that vein with the completion of it or another vein."
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	"If there remains in the location for some days a blackness or greenness, do not heed this. But if you wish, pause upon it with some cause of Aloes and Myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or chamomile or similar things."
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"Many times ulcers and elevations occur because of phlebotomy at the basilica."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	"Therefore pause your hand upon that [the ulcer], and if you should press too much with your compression, then that elevation is harmful and bad. And therefore guard yourself to pause upon it with some cause of what we have said because much blood flows from the artery."
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"The affected area should be made rigid using a plaster containing an astringent substance to toughen it. Then treat this with another remedy until healing is achieved."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"Remove blood from every person according to their strength and the prevailing color above their blood, as it appears."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	"If the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red. Similarly, if it appears thick, allow it to flow until it becomes thin. Likewise, if it is sharp, wait until its sharpness is relieved."
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	"For those who are full and strong, and require bloodletting at one sitting, the vein should be opened widely, and the incision should be long."
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	"In the case of the lean person, do the opposite. Bloodletting should be done in several sessions and the opening should be narrow."
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	"The best way to perform bloodletting from a vein is through a transverse cut, not a puncture."
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	"This method of bloodletting is safer from bleeding and injury to nerves. It is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting done according to length and width."
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	"If syncope is likely to occur during bloodletting, you should prepare the patient beforehand with a little bread soaked in wormwood wine or simple oxymel. Remove blood at that location in three or four sessions."
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	"If the patient is cold in temperament, then before bloodletting, give them bread soaked in myrrh syrup or aromatic honey syrup spiced with pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar spices, or highly fragrant syrup."
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"If syncope occurs during bloodletting due to the loss of too much blood, then you should give them water made from meat and fragrant honey syrup to drink. Use aromatics such as aloe and apply it topically around the area."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	"And use the other causes that have been mentioned in the division under the chapter of syncope from evacuation."
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	"For those who wish to raise their arm and dissolve the blood on the second day, bloodletting should be done for excessive evacuation. The strength of the bleeding will be weak, gradually evacuating the blood according to the quantity of the strength over several days."
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	"However, for those who wish to raise their arm and draw blood again on the second day, and have a strong constitution, they should do so approximately 7 to 9 hours after the first bloodletting."
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"But those who wish to draw blood from their body in opposition to the direction of the part that declines, it should be done on the second or third day."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	"But for those bodies in which there is already scanty blood and it is sharp and causes fever, blood should be drawn from them once, drawing out a large quantity. Attention should be paid so that syncope occurs, as you will have conserved all the conditions of bloodletting. Place your hand on the pulse of their body to prevent death occurring instead of syncope, for many times this happens due to ignorance and negligence."
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	"And when you wish to release the arm and evacuate blood again on the second day, even if the vein opening has closed and it is difficult to draw out blood, do not press upon it with violence. Rather, press gently with the hand slightly curved, as this is too harmful."
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	"Let the bloodletting be done a second time until it flows freely. Or remove the acuteness of the bloodletting that has coagulated in the vein opening with a gentle pressure using tragacanth gum or saguenaria. Pause upon it and press gently until the blood flows out."
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	"And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	"And if there is a necessity to provoke evacuating blood again and it is not an excuse, then perform bloodletting on that location or on the other arm in another vein."
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	"And the vein called 'funis of the arm' is bled in place of the cephalic or basilica veins when they are not prominent or are hidden. For it consists of those."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient places their hand in cold water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly."
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	"And bloodletting should be done gently with a ligature made from woolen thread with moderate tightness. And bloodletting should be performed transversely in small sections, not latitudinally nor lengthwise."
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	"And let the opening be wide and let your bloodletting with which you bleed that person be done just above the junction of the hand."
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your need is satisfied."
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	"But if it is summertime, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water. And the mesh is paused for bloodletting in cold water during wintertime."
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	"And bloodletting from this vein is safer than all other veins because it has neither a palpable vein nor nerves."
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	"And bloodletting of the little vein on the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that you should tighten the hand with a ligature or your hand, having placed it in cold water until the vein becomes inflated and clearly visible. Perform bloodletting transversely on it; and if some of it remains, do not worry about it."
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	"And take care not to finish your hand during bloodletting, because there are nerves in these veins that are bare of flesh."
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	"And again immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not immerse it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the vein opening and the flow will be prohibited."
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	"And when blood is drawn according to the necessary quantity, then press upon the vein with oil and salt so that it does not close suddenly. And do likewise for any other wound."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	"But the benefit of bloodletting from this vein on the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen."
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	"And do likewise in bloodletting this one as you did the other."
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein called 'sephena' is for diseases that are in the parts below the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and diseases of the sinews, ulcers of the skin and old sores, and their like."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should place their foot in cold water and make friction over it until the veins become clearly visible. Then tie a ligature around the junction of the foot; the location of the vein appears just below the said knee, and it branches out into many small branches on the face of the foot."
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	"And then bleed the thickest branch or one of those below the knee towards the ankle joint because it is better and safer."
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	"And if you bleed this vein on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are near it on the face of the foot, and pause your bloodletting with that which you use for bleeding across, as if you wished to cut it."
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	"And let the bloodletting be moderate."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"But if you cannot draw blood, then immerse the foot in cold water again and let the blood run into it until it is evacuated."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	If the flebotomist errs in the first attempt, then try again with the flebotomy a little higher up, for the vein is swollen; and do not fear the malignant humor, but guard against damaging nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	Similarly do the same to the other leg.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the saphenous vein, the location is as we have said, behind the ankle joint below the head of the fibula.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	The benefit of bloodletting for this condition is to relieve pain in the hip when it is used to remove heat.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	The characteristic of bloodletting for this condition is that the patient enters a bath, and quickly and firmly binds the vein on the inner side of the thigh above the ankle joint with a long thin bandage so that it does not become visible except through that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And then when it appears, immediately flebotomize according to each vein that you are able to and according to the traverse, and it is better; or else incise that with an incision or cut that one with a section, for the location of this one is swollen.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is more common in men and less so in women. And if you find that one, and it does not appear to the touch at all, then immediately flebotomize some branch of this one, and it is that which appears on the back of the hand towards the little finger and the ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And beware of the nerves, and let flow as much blood as you wish.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And moreover untie the ligature and press on the place of the bloodletting firmly for a short time, for it heals easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Concerning venesection and the qualities to use that one
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Bloodletting is done with a lance, or a needle, or a vein-opener.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And bloodletting is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this bloodletting that is without scarification is done in two ways, for either it is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And the places on the body where bloodletting is administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen in number, among which one is where bloodlettings are paused: at the nape of the neck, which is the last part of the head; and the middle place of it on both parts of the neck equally; and bloodlettings on the chin, below the jawbone but above the mouth; and bloodlettings on the two spatulas; and bloodlettings on the hollow of the hand, which is at the end of the wrist; and bloodlettings on the two elbows, which are on the two arms; and bloodlettings on the two knees; and bloodlettings on the two ankles.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And bloodletting does not extract blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not cut off virtue by those means, just as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is it necessary that bloodletting be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the whole body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if bloodletting is provoked by illness or by continuity, we administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at any time.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause of this is that in men the blood multiplies within them until they need extraction of it by bloodletting and they become heavy and bloated. And there are those who have repletion and heat in their face and head, and neck. And there are those who have pressure in their face and forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes. And there are those who vomit the place of their bloodletting. And there are those whose laughter is multiplied. And there are those who have a taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is inflamed and spits blood. And there are those whose sleep is multiplied, and those who see blood in dreams, redness and blotches and plagues and other similar causes according to their appearance.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when there are times in any of those causes, and particularly if it is at the third or mid-month, we command bloodletting to be done after two or three hours have passed since that time.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the nape of the neck is that when it alleviates heaviness in the head and prevents collapse on the eyes, but it is necessary that this be an appropriate evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this bloodletting is located at the site of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	It is not right to use this [bloodletting] in those who have a feverish condition or catarrh, for it gives great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not necessary to use that bloodletting on the elderly, and on those whose heads have feverish illnesses
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But above that, if it is continued upon it, forgetfulness occurs; and therefore you should command the bloodletter to pause his hand slightly after the bloodletting at the places where forgetfulness is generated.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But bloodletting from the armpit is located at the site of phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica vein: and therefore it alleviates asthma, and constriction of the breath, and the division of the windpipe of the lung, and coughing, and repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary that the armpit bloodletting be done gently, for if it is done forcefully it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And bloodletting from the temple alleviates accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, and pleurodynia, and toothache; and it is located at the site of phlebotomy of the basilica vein
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And you should command the bloodletter not to press his hand during scarification lest he wound the artery and cause bleeding
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And bloodletting below the chin alleviates hoarseness in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and it is similar to those illnesses that are in the mouth; and it stands at the site of phlebotomy of Alephairic, which are on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But bloodletting that is done over the two shoulder-blades alleviates headaches, which are caused bypletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And bloodletting from the two places below the eyebrows alleviates the benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, that is, the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins, for it attracts blood from all those veins multiplied in the flesh, and those small veins from the other veins more thick until attraction reaches the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the bloodletter not to proceed with scarification, for that place is devoid of flesh, and thus it has nerves and arteries there
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a bloodletting with which blood is let from the buttocks and alleviates hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are there
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And you should command the bloodletter that it be a large bloodletting, and of iron, for that place requires strong sectioning; and many subtle bloodlettings are drawn out by strong suction, and it should be scarified with scarification
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But bloodlettings from the calves diminish by diminution evidently for they draw out blood from all the body and alleviate old pains of the kidneys and abdomen, and bladder; and they provoke menstruation and alleviate botch and dimple; and they stand at the site of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, Alachoben, and two cavillas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	But they greatly weaken the whole body and cause fainting in many men
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And bloodletting at Alachoben has benefit similar to that of bloodletting from both calves
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	"The position of the windpipe is such that it begins wide and gradually narrows due to suction. Do not prolong this position excessively, but rather pause gently and remain quietly so that the humors can come together evenly."
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	"And do not stop iterating this until you see the spot already reddening and swelling, and notice the appearance of blood's color."
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	"And then you shall slowly scratch and irritate the skin little by little, taking care with the position of the body."
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	"And that man who has tender skin from few hairs, it is necessary that you scratch him once and not twice, for the place not to become ulcerated."
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	"And command the blower to amplify the scarification, and press gently, and keep the suction easy."
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	"And if the blood is thickened, then it is necessary to scratch twice, for in the first time the way of subtleization in the blood and its moisture is opened."
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	"But on the second occasion, with careful scrutiny, the extraction of thick blood should be obtained."
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	"And if the blood is too fetid, then the third scratch should not be done so that it can succeed."
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little bit, one scratch is enough for us."
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	"And if we want to extract much blood, we scratch with much scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to scratch for a strong scarification."
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	"The term 'scarification' refers only to the depth of the cut."
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	"And if the skin of that person is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, then the places where the cups will be used should be anointed with lenitive, opening, and dissolving substances; if it is in summer, thus as oil of aloe or violet oil, or oil of bitter almonds, or oil of cumin seed; and if it is in winter, then narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or blood should be used for those similar."
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	"And if the superfluity is thick and fatty, then the oil should be bitter almond, balsamite oil, aloe oil, or aneth oil, and similar ones."
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"But if the person being cupped has wide pores and tender skin, then it is prohibited to use oil; and for this person, the places where the cups will be applied should be washed with warm or hot water of solatrum, cumin seed water, or pennyroyal water, and similar ones to those."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	"And for the person whose blood is very moist, wash his cups with sour wine, or myrtle and sumac water, and similar ones."
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	"And for the person whose superfluities are thick, wash his cups with old wine, or water of sansuc (majoram), or decoction of aneth, or chamomile, and similar ones."
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	"And it is necessary that the cupping be done before a bath; having to administer it close to the moment of bathing for one or two hours, and it is necessary that he/she sleeps close to the cupping."
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	"What is this: that it is necessary for the person being cupped to be regulated before cupping."
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	"And it is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person being cupped or the one who should bleed him/her has a choleric nature and vents over sharp blood and inflammation, then he/she should take causes of cooling, such as sour apple milk, chicory with vinegar and lettuce, and secanolabum, julep, and similar ones."
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	"And pause their foods such as pheasants, birds of prey meat, and sour seasoned foods, and similar ones."
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	"And for the person whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he/she drink rosehip syrup with honey, or syrup of fennel seed, sumac, and myrrh, and let him/her be advised to use sparingly of drinking and eating, and avoid foods of pheasant, rabbit, partridges, small birds, and pigeons."
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	"And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and bloodletting, drinking should be greater than eating."
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	"And it is necessary to give some men tyriaca altharca or muscatel medicaments, such as musk powder, or alcelet before cupping or bloodletting, so that the principal members are comforted and that the blood be subtilized; but those who have scabies should not take it."
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	"But the cupping that is not done with scarification are those that are done to pause its liver, and on the navel and gout, and on the umbilicus, in the joints of the elbows, and the armpit of the axilla, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	"And it is not desired for these except the attraction of blood from the member, such as pausing cupping on the breast in disease of flux of bloody blood from the nose; and they use it so that cold hard inviscid cupping may be dissolved from the member, such as pausing on the abdomen and navel; because this rarifies the member and scratches it and removes pain by resolving the cupping."
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	"And already cupping is paused on the temples when there occurs in them oppression or dizziness, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out oppression and expels dizziness from its place."
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	"And similarly, it does when cupping is paused on the liver and spleen to resolve that which is enclosed therein."
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	"And these cuppings are administered with suction only; but some are also administered with fire."
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	"And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in the diseases of the spleen."
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	"And this is why the cupping should be filled and made larger, that is cold water alone or water in which suitable herbs are cooked."
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	"Form of cupping administered with fire: let the width of the opening be that of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and let the quantity of the pitch be at most a palmful; and let it be on his side, in the place that is in the circuit, as much as him/her, and let the wick be small according to the quantity that enters into it like a needle."
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	"Let it be made of wormwood or citrus with thick margins, lion's tooth, hawthorn and myrtle, so that the member does not hurt from its position upon it."
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	"And let it be placed in the middle of the transverse line of wormwood or iron where the candle with fire is paused."
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	"And already this cupping should be much larger than that which we have recommended, and the lesser one according to the diseases and state of him/her who uses it."
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	"And the cuppings of children and weak ones are different from those of young people and robust ones."
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	"And the quality of pausing this cupping with fire on the member is that it extends the mecha with fire from decently burned wood before a small candle of wax, and pauses it on the middle of the transverse line in the middle place of the cupping, so that the fire may be kindled around the edge without burning the body of the sick person."
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	"And immediately it should be paused on the member of the sick person, and let the wick that we have said be on top, until when we have the cuppings and do not need to hold the wick, then the vapor will rise over that wick, immediately the cupping will be dissolved."
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	"And soon after, extinguish the wick according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	"But in cupping that is administered in the disease of pleurisy with water, there is neither transverse line nor wick, and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water, and it is paused on the member alone."
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	"And this is its form: And this cupping, the larger it is, the better, for it can receive a large quantity of water."
Capitol .xcvii.	"Chapter 97."
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	"Bloodletting is not performed on certain members except in cases where the use of cupping glasses is impossible due to their small size, such as the lips, gum and similar areas; or on members that are devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose, and their like."
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	"And the quality of using those bloodsuckers that are found in clean waters from ponds."
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	"And they should be let loose during the day and night in clean water until they are hungry, ensuring that there is no cause for vomiting in their stomachs. And first, the body should be emptied with phlebotomy and cupping glasses. And the limb of the patient should be rubbed until it turns red. And then they should be placed on it."
E cum son umplidas e caso.	"And when they are full, they should be removed."
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	"If it is possible to suck out the location with cupping glasses, this is preferable in treatment."
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	"And if not, then wash the location with vinegar and hot water. And rub it and press on it."
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	"If the body's blood flow is prolonged near the skin's blood vessels, and this is prominent, then you should immerse a cloth in hot water and apply it on top to cover the prominence."
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	"If blood is abundant, then sprinkle on it vitriol trisulcated, or powders and substances similar to those of the stiptics, until the blood has ceased. Or place on the spot many pods of cooked broad beans, and leave them there until they adhere to the spot and the blood has ceased."
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	"If necessary, repeat the application of leeches when it is possible to change those that have been used."
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	"If bloodletting by leeches is prohibited due to suspension, then the spot should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle inserted into the spots until blood flows; and these should be applied immediately when any blood is felt."
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	"When you want them to fall off, sprinkle on them a little powdered aloe, salt, or ash, and they will soon fall off."
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	"This is how the chapter of the third part begins: On restoration."
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	"This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and concerns the restoration of fractures and accidents of dislocation in bones."
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	"Oh, son, know that those who boast of this chapter are foolish doctors and the common people, and those who have never regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them."
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	"And because of this reason it happens that this method is private among the learned in our land; and I have not forgotten this during all my life; nor have I added what follows except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over their understanding, so as to extract science from them."
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	"And therefore I direct this to experiment and study throughout my life's duration."
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	"And I have already described in this chapter all that my science contains and about which my experiment has passed; since here I have briefly for you others and relieved myself of the occupation of lengthening it; and abbreviated it to the point of abbreviation; and shown it to the point of declaration; and formed many forms of instruments administered therein, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters."
Capitol primier.	"Chapter One."
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	"Summaries and collections of the essence of bone fractures, from which a preamble is necessary before we begin to remember the members that are broken and diverse if each one."
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	"It is therefore necessary that I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the discourse, and the chapters under whose understanding the artisans are forced to stay at rest over their truth, so that you and those who are eager may know or learn this noble art besides you."
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	"And therefore I say that when some fracture or dislocation or torsion or concussion happens, it is necessary at the beginning to bleed that one with flebotomy or to alleviate him, or whatever ensemble you may prohibit any cause, as debility of virtue, or if he is a child or old in decrepitude, or if it is time of violent heat or cold."
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	"And therefore it is necessary to content him with his food of fresh herbs and meat of birds and crayfish; and prohibit gross meats and full viandas and all vianda that fills the veins with blood, so that you may be sure of avoiding an abscess, and if you are not afraid of effusion of matter in the member."
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	"And therefore it is necessary to return the patient to his first regimen with which he was accustomed to live."
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	"And therefore when the bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with nutrient foods rich and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of wheat cooked with water, rice, chicken, eggs, beef, butter, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar ones; and with this regimen coagulation of fracture is performed more easily and better."
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	"And know that the bones of those who are in their first vigor and those who are old do not have it possible for them to be joined and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members."
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	"And they are consolidated and joined according to their nature throughout time due to the dryness of those members, and they are joined and consolidated those that are of them at the end of longevity, as the bones of young children."
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	"But nonetheless nature adjusts and adapts itself to the bone broken in any part whatsoever, as glue that adheres and strengthens it insofar as it is conglutinated and united together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, as fire at the beginning, insofar as no cause prohibits it from its works."
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And for this reason it is necessary that you suspend the patient's foods, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said."
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	"Great diversity of fracture according to diversity of member."
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	"And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves."
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	"And I come with a reminder of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinguished from the others."
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	"Great diversity of fracture within itself."
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	"And the species of fractures of the bone are diversified within themselves; for an arched fracture occurs in some other way than stellar ones do; and sometimes it is made according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the satagia and stars and additional ones that occur and do not occur, as happens in the pen when it is prepared to write, and a fracture with plugging and disruption in the head, and a small fissure fracture."
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	"And to each species there is a proper pain or torment in its restoration, according to what will come later the reminder of it distinguished in its places."
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	"Great sign of fracture of the bone."
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	"And for this reason a fracture of the bone is known: its tortuosity and prominence and depression at touch, and it also happens when you press it with your hand."
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	"And therefore when there is no apparent tortuosity nor does it happen that any pain is made upon touching the bone with agitation and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here."
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	"It is possible that there may be tortuosity or a small fissure, therefore you should not move it with your hand and compress everything; rather pause upon it regarding the medicines of which reminder will be made at that moment which is convenient for the place; and especially let there be straightening through subtle restriction."
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	"And know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or other than stellar ones do, since all its parts are removed, then you should begin at your hour to straighten it insofar as an abscess may happen."
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	"And if an abscess occurs there, then leave it for some days until the abscess stops; and then splint it according to each manner that you can of elevation and binding."
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	"And know that restoration of it and binding of it is easier than the bone in which stellar ones occur."
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	"And then strengthen it according to what will come the reminder of it."
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	"But if there are stars in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member in two parts, if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand."
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	"The position you take to pause the affected limb should be according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended. Then you should endeavor to return those additions with ingenuity and according to each manner that you can in their places."
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	"And be careful, according to your knowledge, not to cause harm to the patient through your operation of their limbs or injury. And endeavor, according to your ability, to apply one bone with another in its best forms."
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	"And it is necessary that at that opportune time you touch him with your hand firmly, and if any different cause arises, correct him and equalize him according to the quantity of your strength."
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	"And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do who often cause an abscess to cauterize by their operation or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen happen too often."
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	"And apply appropriate bandages, appropriate dressings and proper operation, and strict compression of that limb, and rest and tranquility. Instruct the patient on this and have them avoid moving it during their watch and sleep times, and observe its movements and agitations, and direct all his movements with all his strength; and await until the position of the limb is one in which pain is assured, which is when he feels in the disposition of the position of the affected limb or injury. Then it is necessary to change that to another position where there is no pain. And be careful that the position of this is straight and equal, so that the limb does not become twisted when restored."
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	"And the quality of compression for a limb in repose is that which I recommend, because you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness, and in their shape."
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	"And for those that are small, like the arm, hand, and foot, and similar ones, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth."
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	"But for those that are large, like the thigh or calf, it is necessary to have a wrapping that is thick and strong, because tight wrapping connects the limb well and compresses it equally on all sides, so that nothing enters inside."
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	"And at the beginning, begin your compression of the dressing, pause appropriately according to what is necessary, over the location of that fracture with three wrappings or four, depending on how much the limb deserves it. And tighten your hand a little with the bandage."
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	"And when you have wrapped up to that point beyond the highest part of the fracture location, then tighten more so that your compression is not lessened by what you have used to compress the fracture site."
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	"And then extend yourself with wrapping from the fracture site a little way, and gradually loosen the compression until you reach about half the length of the limb."
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	"And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken site with wrapping, and extend yourself with wrappings beyond the fracture location. And your operation should be in tightening the wrapping and loosening it gradually according to what was said earlier about the first wrapping."
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	"And then pause between the wrappings with a layer of wool or cloth with which to equalize any twisting of the fracture, if there is any twisting in it. And otherwise, do not pause for any reason."
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	"And then pause over the other bandage, and then press down upon those wrappings carefully made at that time, if there is no inflammation or cauterized abscess in that location. And otherwise, pause over what covers the abscess or inflammation; and leave it like that for a few days. And then tighten over those wrappings."
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	"And the splints should be made of thin, fine reeds, well-shaped; or they can be made of wood from a fig tree, or branches of palm. And each splint should be about this width and shape:"
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	"However, the splint placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the other splints, and its length should be proportional to the size of the limb. And then tighten over those splints with another bandage according to your first compression; and then lay above it with felt carefully, according to what was said about compression, so that your compression is stronger at the fracture site, and as it goes further from the fracture, the compression should be lessened."
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	"And the threads should be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of wool. And if the threads are thick, like those used by some foolish people who use cords of twisted flax for their operations, it is a great error when compression is uneven."
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	"And very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve compression with them as you wish. And there should be less than one finger's breadth between splint and splint."
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	"And if the pain is felt at the ends of the splints near the compression in those places, then pause with wool or carded lamb's wool between them until it stops hurting."
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	"Sometimes a fracture occurs with plague, and disruption of the knee joint happens. I have spoken about this in Chapter 18 on singularities."
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	"And know that not all broken limbs are bound with splints on the first day; because when a limb is large, you should wait for about 5 or 7 days, or more, according to your certainty of the appearance of a cauterized abscess before binding it with splints."
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	"And this is the method used by plasterers to restore fractures, dislocations, and distortions."
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"The method of plastering commonly used for the restoration of fractures is convenient for many complications, especially for women and children because it does not bring heat or friction. And you should take powder from a millstone; that is, the bran left over after the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And it is ground like that, but sifted with chalk and water, and used thickly and coarsely."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another method of plastering for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and distortions: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and miguel, which is the resin of wild mastic, all of them ground and sifted and mixed with aloe or chalk water if the condition is scaly. And use this plaster because it has a good composition and restores lightly broken bones, suitable for many people."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another method of plastering that suits fractures and distortions: Take miguel resin and white wax, each one dragma x; myrrh and aloe each dragma v; acacia dragma vi; and Armenian bole dragma xx."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"All of these are ground together in a mortar with great care, sifted, mixed with water or chalk water, and applied."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"Method of plastering for joints and separated bones in their locations, and also useful for pain accidentally occurring in those areas, as well as for cracks and fractures: Take clean wool, immerse it in vinegar and cooked oil, and apply it to the location."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"But this plaster does not have the virtue of restoration nor does it prevent or cure cauterized abscesses and does not properly expel pains."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: Take leaves from wild fig trees and poppy pods, mix them together and make a plaster out of them."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Mix in equal parts of ale root, chamomile flowers, and violet flowers. Add ground iris flour until thickened. If the limb is not scratched, boil with wine and apply as a plaster for bone fracture restoration or to resolve remaining abscesses.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	If it is scratched, then soak it in coriander water made wet with water and apply the plaster.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another method of plaster that is even stronger in resolving than the first one when an abscess occurs during bone restoration: Take equal parts of ale root and seed, balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, and ground iris. All are crushed and cooked with willow water or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the rest of its color.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be plastered on the broken limb during its restoration, but rather recommends a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else. He advises that it should be medium-soft between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, it is seen that in Galen's book, plasters are applied on the broken limb during its restoration and the causes of drying with slight heat are such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar ones for those same causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Method of plaster that relieves injury and pain: Take equal parts of niter, cypress, human hair cuttings or bird feathers, and ale root. All are ground together and sifted, then cooked to make the plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	However, if the amount according to how much remains of the plaster and it is appropriate to be loosened, it should be considered that if there is no pain or swelling nor has the bone broken, then it should not be removed too soon.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or swelling or inflammation at the location, then you should remove it immediately in that hour and take off the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And then take some linen and a wet sea sponge, immerse it in hot water, and with that wash the area inside until the swelling stops and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour. Then plaster it again with wool submerged in sour wine and oil or rose oil, laying it on top of it for one night to ensure the formation of a dry abscess and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided and its pain has disappeared.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat that gentle strapping with a small plaster again, not tightening too much the first time, and gently until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if at some point the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation, and all other accidents have disappeared completely, then you should again plaster and strap it as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no cause of those that we have mentioned appears on the limb, then you should not remove it before three days or four or five or seven. And sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what you see through the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and joins together with the coagulation of the flesh above it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the strapping more tightly than the first time, according to how much the swelling of the limb has decreased by remembering it.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you find the location of the fracture already dry and shrunken more than it should be, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, immerse it every day that you remove the plaster with hot water until all is done in three days. Then loosen the strapping a little, and through this operation the limb receives nourishment and heals easily.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do again when it was not restored at first, according to how it should have been restored, and is restored crookedly, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear. And if they were right, the Ancients would have enlarged upon this in their books and practiced it.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, which is why it is more reasonable that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Two: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	Fracture types are many, and their appearances are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by blows that break all the bone within the cavity, leaving the bone like a log, thus this type is called compression; or the blow cuts some part of the bone without cutting deep into the flesh; and this type of fracture is called avulsion.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The plague of these two fractures is either great or small, and it occurs in compression or tension fractures. The cause of this is a blow accompanied by force or impact on bone, and they appear similar to each other.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This fracture is either penetrating, nearly reaching the surrounding soft tissue around the bone, or it occurs on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two fractures can be either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And there is a fracture that occurs within the bone itself, in its smallest detail resembling a hair's breadth, and thus this type of fracture is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	There is also a fracture that occurs from impact or blow by a hard object which causes some of the bone layers to enter into the inner parts, and this happens at the concave location like what happens to eggshells when they are struck and their inner parts break open.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This usually occurs in the bodies of human bones, especially the heads of long bones such as femurs or tibias.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And therefore all these species of fractures appear like stars separated by lines.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I have brought all this to your attention in its proper place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	Know all these types of fracture by their detection on the surface and by inquiring about them through touch and examination of corrupted flesh around them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	Capillary fractures are recognized by the fact that they appear as small dark lines on the surface of the bone, which can be wiped clean and felt with the fingertips. These lines appear black when examined closely.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	"In treating fractures, consider initially the patient's symptoms. If you find them significant due to manifest fear, such as vomiting from cholera, diarrhea, loss of consciousness, fainting spells, high fever, discharge from the eyes and ears, and similar symptoms in severe conditions, then healing is doubtful."
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	"If you find non-life-threatening symptoms, then proceed with treatment."
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	"If the patient comes to you already injured, especially if it happened during winter days around December 14th, then you should examine the bone before treating according to proper procedure."
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	"If it happens during summer days, then you should examine the bone on the 7th day, ensuring that the surrounding flesh is not corrupted and that symptoms as recommended have occurred."
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	"If the fracture has already reached the muscular tissue covering the brain and is in pieces with attrition, then you should insert the comminuted and attritional fragments as I will instruct you."
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	"And after shaving the head of the patient, uncover the bone according to your custom and ability following the shape of the injury, making it easy for the patient."
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	"If you detect the bone through skin wounds or pus accumulation, then pause your procedure according to what is necessary. If you see fluid oozing from the wound, place cloths soaked in wine and rose oil on it until the inflammation subsides and blood flow ceases. Then begin with the circumcision of the bone and its removal."
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	"And this is according to one of two operative methods."
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And one method is that you insert the bone with a narrow-bladed incision knife, and this is its shape: Then administer another incision knife, slightly wider than the first one, and this is its shape:"
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"And then use an even wider incision knife."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"And you should have different types of incision knives available in various sizes, some wider than others and some shorter than others with sharp tips made of iron or steel."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"Use them skillfully to strike the incision without hitting the head or hurting the patient."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"If the bone is hard and tough, then you should first drill around it before administering the incision knives with the handles, which are called non-penetrating handles."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"However, these are not called non-penetrating handles but rather those which do not penetrate the end of the bone at that point where it is about to be cut. For the handle has a round tip or edge on that side which is left behind with an acute head similar to a small margin or circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"And it is convenient for you to take many of these handles, each suitable for the thickness of each bone. So that you may have them ready during all surgeries on the brain, with tips that are sharp and their length and width according to the thickness of the bone."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"And this is the shape of three types of handles:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	E approprincipitally cut with scissors what is between each trace of the bone, and collect that subtle pus which you can gather at the end of the incision, as we have said, before you remove the bone, either with your hand or with some other cause through certain instruments which you shall have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	E que tu gardas que l'inscissori non tocave null'am causa del ciphac.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	E donc cum auras circuyt lo os perforat, e sera separat del ciphac si es continuat amb ell, e auras aquell extrayt, covent et engualhar aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en lo os amb altra esturment semblante a inscissori, però covent que sia pus teon i pus subtil que las altres incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	E si roman alguna partida dels ossos petitos i satajas, llavors pren aquella amb facilitatz amb aqüell que és deves tu dels esturments; e aprop aquò cures la plaça amb liniments i engueix els quals havem dit.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	E l'altra manera d'operació és més lleugera i llunyana del pau, la qual diu Galien i l'elogia per gran elogista; i aquest és el seu discurs: és necessari que al principi comencis a discoverir la partida de l'os del lloc on hi ha la fractura més visible i evident, entre que quan haves descobert aquella partida i haves posat de banda l'extremitat d'aquest incisi lent i alegre, el qual aquesta és la seva forma:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	E és que la partida lenticular és llarga i no incideix cap causa, i la partida aguda és de l'altura de les dues cares davants en longitud, així com es veuen; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac amb la cara de l'incisió aguda a l'os.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	E després, percuteu sobre l'incisi d'una partida amb un petit martell fins a tallar tot l'os amb facilitat com si girés, i tu estàs segur que el panicul no es podrà produir en aquest accident que temis de cap manera; i si el metge era el més bo de tots els homes i el més ignorant d'ells; certament, i si fos dormit.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	Ara, si hi ha cap causa annexada a l'os del panicul en alguns llocs de l'os, talla aquella amb l'extremitat d'aquest incisi lenticular i allibera-la d'aquell lloc amb facilitat, perquè és alliberada d'aquell lloc sense nociu ni por.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	I si la fractura de l'os no penetra dins el panicul i allò que es abscis o es ostenta de l'os és la seva cara i roman amb aspereza i petites arrugues, llavors cal que arrasin aquesta aspereza i erradiquin aquestes arrugues amb rasuradors subtils dels quals tu has preparat diversos nombres de diferents quantitats perquè sigui possible aplicar-ne els més convenients en tot lloc segons allò on haures d'actuar aquest os trencat i la seva figura.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	I cal que administres en la teva raó quan rasures l'os al principi els més amples dels rasuradors i després els més subtils, i no deixis de fer-ho fins a arribar a aplicar els més aguts i subtils de tots.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	però en cadascuna d'aquelles altres petites fractures capil·lars i fractures subtils, cal que apliques cura segons com tu has trobat per rectificar-ho.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	I és que no s'ameguda sobre tots aquells que han estudiat en aquesta art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	I això és el que hem demostrat en fractures grosses.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	I si el panicul es reté quan tu erradiquis l'os, llavors cal que agafis drap segons la quantitat de la ferida, i sumergis aquell en oli rosat, i posis-lo sobre la ferida; després pren altre drap doble o triple, sumerge'l en vi i oli rosat i posar-ho sobre un drap prim, i fa-ho tan lleugerament com puguis sobre aquest, sense gravar el ciphac; i finalment aplica-hi un liant gruixut, però no estrenyis aquest només per la quantitat que tinga la ferida.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	I deixeu-lo amb aquesta cura durant un dia o dos fins que esteu segur de l'apostema caut; després, retireu-ho i aplica-hi medicaments per evitar la siccitat excessiva, com ara raig d'oli de llinos i farina d'erba, pols d'henna i aristologia, i altres semblants.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	I també pots fer d'aquestes medines pols que s'hagin aplicat a la ferida de manera seca; i, generalment, aplica-hi tots els medicaments que tinguin la propietat d'aseure i no de morder.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	I mantingues la netedat de la ferida durant el teu tractament i no deixis que s'omple de suc o d'altres coses; i no deixis que es faci virulent a causa del teu tractament, perquè quan s'aplica sobre el panicul del cervell, es corromp i pot produir malaltia greu.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	I també pot ocórrer al ciphac del cap quan l'os és mondificat i més encara quan se'n fa el tractament; i si això passa, apareixerà una negror a la superfície d'aquest. En aquest cas, si s'han produït les accidents que hem mencionat abans, sabràs que ha estat un cas fatal.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	I si no s'hi ha produït negror, sinó només a causa de la medicina aplicada sobre ell, és per la virtut d'aquesta medicina que s'ha produït aquesta negror. En aquest cas, cal prendre una part de mel i tres parts d'oli rosat i barrejar-los amb un drap; després posar-lo sobre el ciphac i aplicar-hi especis de curació fins que s'hagi guarir.
Capitol .iii.	Capítol III
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Quant al capítol III, parla de la restauració del nas quan es trenca. Es diu que si el nas es trenca per una caiguda o un cop, cal aplicar-li una cura immediata perquè no es produïsca una ferida profunda. Si això passa, s'ha de netejar la ferida amb aigua bullent i després es pot aplicar un liant fet amb mel i vi. També es recomana l'ús d'unes pinces per estirar els extrems trencats del nas fins que s'ajunten perfectament; després cal aplicar-hi una bèndiga feta de llana impregnada en oli d'oliva, i fixar-la amb un cotó. Finalment, es diu que cal esperar tres dies abans de retirar la bèndiga.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Has de saber que el nas no es trenca en dues parts alhora i més amunt, ni en una d'aquelles ocasions que es veuen, perquè té dos ossos. La partida esquerra és cartilaginosa i no es trenca; només hi ha atricció, tortuositat i sinuositad.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	però si es trenca una de les dues parts del nas, llavors cal introduir el dit petit dins del seu nas i empènyer l'os trencat amb el dit índex i el dit polze de fora, fins que el nas torni a tenir la seva forma natural.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	I cal fer això amb cura i evitant causar dolor al pacient.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	I si la trencada és a l'os més alt del nas i el dit petit no arriba fins allí, cal usar l'extremitat d'un ganxo de mida petita.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	I si la trencada afecta les dues parts del nas, llavors hauràs de fer el mateix que s'ha descrit anteriorment.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	Cal actuar amb rapidesa per a restaurar el nas en el primer dia després de la trencada, si és possible. Si no ho és, cal esperar fins que s'hagi resolt l'hematoma i aplicar un cataplasma càustic.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	"And then insert into the tip of the nose a cloth plug, if the fracture is in one part, or two cotton balls, if it is in two parts, and ensure that the cloth or cotton is thick enough to fill the passage of the nose."
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	"And some of the ancient restorers say that cotton balls should be wrapped in linen and changed throughout the day, but this is not visible to me; however it is necessary that the plug should be inserted into a piece of alum and powdered myrrh."
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	"And sometimes it is placed in the nose instead of cotton, a piece of linen wrapped around it; even if there is strong fracture and inflammation preventing inspiration."
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	"If this method is not necessary for you, then do as you wish, or use cotton balls instead."
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	"And if there occurs another time an abscess, plaster the nose with wax or fat melted in vinegar and rose oil, or with diacylon."
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	"But if there is no abscess formed, then you should plaster it from the outside with sesame flour and powdered myrrh mixed with alum; and also apply a piece of linen soaked in warm water over it, without ever washing the nose for any reason."
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or crushed, then it is necessary to split them and extract those that are convenient using appropriate instruments; afterwards stitch up the wound and treat it with something that incises and consolidates, along with appropriate plasters."
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	"And if there is inflammation inside the nose, then it should be treated with cotton balls and lead cannulae administered until it is completely healed."
Capitol .iiii.	"Chapter Four."
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	To restore the jaw when it is clenched.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	If the jaw is broken but the fracture does not extend across the entire length and is not displaced or fragmented inward, then its reduction will be easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and do likewise for the left side with your right index finger. Push the bone fragment gently inward with your finger until it aligns properly with the outer edge of the bone using your other hand.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must apply traction to both segments in a straight line until it is possible to achieve reduction.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if teeth are loosened or displaced due to the fracture, then strengthen those that you expect will break with a gold, silver, or copper wire. Then apply pressure on top of the broken jaw using cotton wool, folded linen, and a large sterilized gauze pad or a piece of wood cut to the length of the jaw. Then tie it securely in place according to your preference and the situation at hand, ensuring that it is not too tight as to cause further damage.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	Tell the patient to rest quietly, avoiding any movement of the jaw for about 10 days and to eat soft foods that do not require chewing.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	If you notice that the jaw's position has changed in any way after the reduction, then on the third day, carefully remove the splint and check if there is any alteration in the fracture site. Then pack it with iodoform gauze or plaster of Paris powder mixed with egg albumen or flour paste, ensuring to remove the cotton wool first. Finally, apply a bandage made of linen around the jaw.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And when the splint is securely attached and the position of the bone has not changed, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and strengthened. Often, this type of fracture takes about three weeks to heal completely.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if an abscess forms later on, then apply warm compresses frequently to the affected area until the abscess is drained and healed. You may also use hot saline rinses to help relieve pain and promote healing.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is comminuted (i.e., broken into multiple fragments), then determine whether there are any loose bone fragments or bone spicules present. If so, carefully remove them using appropriate instruments designed for this purpose.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	If the wound from the fracture is large, then you should widen it further with a curette or rongeur according to your needs. This will allow for better visualization of the fracture site and facilitate reduction.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you have removed any loose bone fragments, if there is still some debris present in the wound, then carefully clean it out. If the wound is large, pack it with gauze soaked in an antiseptic solution or a suitable dressing and apply a bandage to keep it in place until healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The clavicle (collarbone) is often fractured near its midshaft and this fracture typically occurs in one of three patterns:
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Broken or separated, or in two parts without accidents; it is easy to restore. Or thus: it occurs with accidents and is difficult to restore.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	In that case, when the fracture is without plague, you should have two ministers present: one to hold the assistant and follow the broken clavicle, and the other to extend the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And appropriately align the fracture with these said tongs so that it may be made according to its proper shape, and without prominence or concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then it is necessary that you place on the skin of the patient's chest a compress made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and raise the clavicle and compress the compress with your hand while aligning the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot bring the end of the clavicle to the outside edges of the fragments, then it is necessary that the patient be raised up on their back and place a bolster made of cloth or wool under the shoulder muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant presses on the muscles at the fragments from below until the bone of the clavicle is raised up to its proper position; then you can correct the fracture and align it with the tongs mentioned earlier.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel resistances from the clavicle and they are painful, then it is necessary that you cut over that area and remove those resistances with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you should perform an incision on it with one of the scalpel blades that you have prepared for this purpose, as you had placed over the clavicle the instrument called "cophac"; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is like this:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it resembles a spoon whose concavity looks like this; and its width should be according to your need, according to the size of the bone or the prominence of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length should be according to what is possible for you during the operation; that it has two extremities like this, and one extremity is wide and the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the skin wound that you made when removing the bone resistance is large and you are sure about causing an abscess, then you should approximate the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small or you fear causing an abscess, then you should fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the wound opening.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then you should take a cloth soaked in vinegar oil and rose oil and wine, and place it on that area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the tightening of the bone when it is without skin and sectioned off is that you place a poultice made of wheat flour with egg white on it, and then place a lion's skin cloth over that, and then press the bolster from below the collarbone if necessary, and then take a long turban-like cloth used by Saracens that is one palm or around that in width; and then place doubled powders over the poultice and emplaster; and then take a thin table board whose width is three fingers and length similarly; and then wrap that with cloth, and then wrap that cloth with the board on the location of the fracture; and then apply humetate like this as it revolves, and then revolve that over the bone from below the collarbone to below the patient's armpit, and reduce it onto all fragments, and thus you will tighten the fracture by tightening downwards, and this is what you should not hide.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all of that, make sure the board is not placed on top of the fractured bone; and for this reason it is important that you see the patient every day, so that when you notice that the bandage has softened or observe that the board has already moved out of place, then you should correct that and tighten the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then place the patient's sleep on the collarbone and place a small pillow below the armpit at night so that the elbow joint is elevated above that side, thereby elevating the clavicle fracture due to the elevation of the muscles, or else the arm should be tied to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandage unless you see that it is healed without any wound or abscess, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the emplaster if you have seen signs of improvement in that area, and adjust it to fit the tightening and restore that and leave it until it has been restored and the clavicle fracture has coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comfortable in about twenty-eight days, although sometimes in some men it may take less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter .VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder blade.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	"The spatula was broken in the right side of his head, but it did not break him, only its edges."
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	"And therefore when the head of him is broken — and it is broken in the middle of his head — and not known except by touching, then according to what is the figure of the fracture, force the preparation of him and reduce that according to the natural figure in every way you can."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	"And first apply powder of ground aloes with egg-white and stop the wound; then apply poultice of doubled cloth; and then apply a layer of subtle table salt according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more."
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	"But if the wound is concave in some places of the spatula, then you will fill that concavity with wax, and then apply the layer according to equality."
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	"And then strengthen it above with a long humid bandage with proper constriction and with firmness of the layer within that it may not be removed from its place."
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	"And consider the bandage every day; and whenever it is softened, change it again and strengthen it and equalize the layer if it has been removed from its place."
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	"And heal the wound on his own face."
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	"And the bandage is restored in 20 days or 25 days."
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	"And then when this number is completed, you will dissolve the bandage, and know for sure which are those bones of which the beginning was not touched nor their dissolution."
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	"And if you proceed to the place of the heavy bone and put down the shoulder, then cut upon it, drain it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of separation of abscess if any occurs here."
Capitol .vii.	**Chapter VII**
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	**On the Restoration of Fractures of the Foot.**
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	"Sometimes the foot is broken in its middle part and then it becomes twisted; but the extremities of it are more often shattered and comminuted."
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	"And when the middle of the foot is broken, its accidents are that it declines towards the inner parts and there occurs great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fever, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not concealed from sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	"And its restoration is that the wound be elevated on its own back, and a bolster placed between its sole; and properly press the muscles of it, and adjust its sides with the aid of two boards, and perform the operation of it and equalization according to all manner that is possible and convenient for it, until the figure of the bone returns according to what is fitting."
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"And then place over it a plaster and gauze, and place over that a thin slice of wood or linen or clay, and wrap that in cloth; and carefully apply that to the broken bone so that it is not moved; and bind it on the back sometimes with a round bandage, and strengthen it with proper constriction; and carefully consider the bandage at all times, and when it is softened, strengthen it."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	"And if it is necessary to remove that bandage due to corruption or pressure or pain or abscess that occurs in the place, then carefully cut and loosen that and eradicate the plaster and correct that which has occurred there according to the manner of curing it; and then replace the plaster, sometimes changing its face; and adjust the constriction until it is healed."
Capitol .viii.	**Chapter VIII**
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	**On the Restoration of Broken Ribs.**
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	"Know that fracture of the ribs occurs only in thick places on the back, and their extremities at the front part are not subject to such injury except for those that are cartilaginous."
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	"And its recognition is not concealed from sensation by inquiry with them."
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	"And the reduction should be done thus: align the fracture with these [tools] in the most possible manner, until it is aligned as necessary. Then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with starch if needed."
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	"If the rib fracture is displaced inward, then it causes severe pain and puncturing, similar to what happens to someone who has been pierced. And because the bone presses on the lung's veil, it makes breathing difficult, coughing, and vomiting of much blood. This condition is difficult to treat."
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	"And already the Ancients used this for many purposes."
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	"And they said: whenever foods pause the sick person who generates inflammation and flatulence, so that the abdomen may be inflated and extended, then the fracture will be pushed outward."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	"But we would not advise this because it could cause a wound infection if not done carefully. And if an infection has already occurred, then this method will not help."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	"And some of them said that it should be paused from above with force and sucked out. And this is like reasoning, but nonetheless it is feared that the suction may draw the superfluities into the lungs due to weakness."
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	"And some of them said: whenever that place is covered with wool that has already been immersed in hot oil, and powders are paused between the ribs until it is filled up, then let the bandage be tied around as tightly as possible according to its roundness; and let the sick person be treated with food and medicinal cure for pleurisy."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"And if the sick person feels violent constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the lung's veil with painful punctures, then we fear for the sick person. Therefore, it is necessary to cut over that place, uncover the broken rib, and pause on top of it the instrument that preserves the cyphac, the memory of which has already been given, and gently chisel away the bone and remove it."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"And moreover, if the wound is large, let us join its edges together with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	"And if an abscess occurs internally, then quickly and gently pour powders mixed with rose oil onto the place, pause it there, and let the sick person be treated with what is appropriate for internal abscesses."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	"And let him lie on his back while sleeping until he is healed."
Capitol .ix.	Chapter ix.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and tartar forms on them, similarly to the spine of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	"And when this happens to someone and you want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider: for if the sinews are already softened, stunned, deadened, and cannot be moved nor extended nor stretched, and when they are constricted with your fingers or pricked with a needle there is no pain felt in them, then you should know that it will not heal, and such conditions are mortal."
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	"And if they can be moved and feel constriction with your fingers or punctures, then you should know that the nape of the bone is saved and that the illness will improve with treatment."
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	"And if it looks similar to this in the spine of the neck, and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, then consider its weight."
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	"Therefore, if you find that the sinews are already softened, it is like what happens in the muscles. And moreover, when he lies on his back, there is difficulty breathing and excretion without his will, and sometimes he lies on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you should know that it is mortal, and therefore do not try to treat it."
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	"But if none of these causes occur, the cause is better and easier to treat."
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	"And the treatment for this is that you should perforate the seat of the internal abscess that has formed on the broken spine with rose oil alone, or mixed with mulled eggs; pause it there several times a day until the abscess is sedated."
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	"And then pause one of the comforting and exiting plasters on it, stretch it with linen; and command the sick person to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed."
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	"And if the inflammation of the bone becomes sagging or some cause is already separated from it, then it is necessary to cut over the backbone and remove that bone. And moreover, join the edges of the wound together with sutures if it is large; and moreover treat it with some incensory of herbs until it is healed."
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	"But if the end of the bone is broken off, and it is the end of the coccyx, then you should insert your left thumb into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible by equilateral grasping; and moreover pause an emplaster and astel on it, if necessary, and stretch it."
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"And if you feel broken sagging bones in it, then cut over that and remove them, and treat the wound with the treatment described earlier until it is healed."
Capitol .x.	Chapter x.
De restauracio de la ancha.	On the restoration of the ankle joint.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	"The bones of the ankles are easily broken, and when they break, their fracture is not other than communion at the ends of them and are inserted in the length and decline towards the inside. And it happens that the sick person feels pain and puncture in that place, and the ankle becomes stunned when there is a fracture."
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	"And the restoration of this is that you should stretch your hand over it until it covers the fracture which has the figure of it."
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	"And if the fracture is only at its end, then you should grasp it according to what seems equal to you by grasping until it fits with its natural figure."
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	"But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined towards the inside, then have the sick person lie on his stomach until you are ready to restore that fracture."
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	"And then when you have grasped it, pause an emplaster on it, and moreover pause a splint of wood or bone on it, and stretch it with great tightness so that there is no fear of puncture from fracture nor removal of the splint."
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	"And grasp the concavity with whatever fills it until that grasps takes on its proper tightness, and command the sick person to sleep on his back or on his side."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	"But if an internal abscess forms, then cease the extension of it and its restoration until the internal abscess is sedated, and pause on it what sedates that according to what has been described earlier. And moreover return to restoring it and stretch it as much as necessary."
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	"And if the sagging bones or they are comminuted, then remove them."
Capitol .xi.	Chapter xi.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	On the restoration of the fracture of the fibula.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	"The fibula is that which is between the thighbone and the head of the shoulder."
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	"And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways. One way is that you should take a flat piece of wood with medium thickness like this:"
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	"And let there be tied at both ends two strips of linen, and moreover it should be suspended from the elevated place."
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	"And have the sick person sit on a chair, and then gently lay his broken arm on the wood so that it reaches its little head in the middle place where the curvature of the wood is attached."
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	"And then suspend some heavy weight on it, or let the assistant gently extend it towards its outer side. And then the doctor should carefully place the fracture together with his hands until the fracture returns to its proper place."
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	"The other method is to have the patient lie on their back and suspend the hand of their neck with a bandage. Then command two assistants, one of whom should hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other should hold them from below; each extending their part."
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	"And if you want the extension to be stronger, then stretch over the fracture with a bandage and over that another one. And each of the two assistants should extend their part."
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	"And if the fracture is close to the extremity of the bone, then half of the bandage should be placed over the joint and the other half below the fracture."
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	"And likewise if the fracture is close to the elbow, then the bandage should be placed over that spot and over that elbow."
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	"First of all it should be done with ease and without trouble; and immediately after, if it is tied correctly and applied properly, then stretch that bandage but avoid causing an abscess."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	"But if an abscess occurs, then leave the bandage on for about seven days, and apply over it a compress made of thread soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess reappears, and then stretch that bandage."
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	"And the way to stretch that bandage is as follows: apply a plaster over the fracture, and then apply a wrapping of wet cloth over the plaster; and also adjust the arm over that support, and place their hand wrapped in linen over their muscle."
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	"And apply the cloth and stretch it over that support for the arm so that the arm is in a still position; unless there is some cause preventing it due to the broken bone."
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	"And then use splints."
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	"And then apply over the fracture that splint which should be placed wider and stronger than the others. And place between each splint the width of a finger; and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture, adding three fingers on either side."
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	"And also stretch over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	"And then your bandage over the location of the fracture should be made tighter."
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	"And as the fracture becomes longer, so the bandage should be looser."
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	"Therefore, if you arrange the splints and bandage in that way as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then do so."
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you fear an abscess occurring, then leave the bandage and splints on for about seven days as we have said."
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	"And also consider the limb in all cases for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs there due to excess bandaging; otherwise, regulate the diet according to what we have said."
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	"But if you are worried that nothing will happen due to this, then do not remove the bandage but leave it on for at least three days or more."
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	"And let his sleep be on his back, and let his hands be placed over his stomach."
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	"And place over the elbow joint a pillow full of wool wrapped in linen. And keep watch at all times during the night or day to ensure that the figure of the broken limb is not displaced nor dissolved, and that the limb remains warm; otherwise, adjust it with your skill."
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	"And arrange the diet of the patient according to the order which we mentioned earlier. Thus, in the beginning the food should be subtle until it is time to begin stretching [the limb]; and then you must gradually increase the amount of food."
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	"As for the custom of removing the splint and changing the bandage, this should be done after forty days. And then it is necessary to remove them and administer baths and medications which heal that [injury]."
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	"If the fracture is already consolidated, then do not remove the bandage from that limb nor the splints for about one day or two months."
Capitol .xii.	"Chapter XII."
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	"Of the reduction of fractures of the arm."
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	"The arm is composed of two bones which are called the two elbow bones. Of these, one is small and it lies next to the thumb; the other is large and it lies above the little finger on the outer side."
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	"And sometimes only the larger elbow bone is fractured, or the smaller one, but often they are both broken together."
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	"And when the small elbow bone is fractured at its upper end, then its reduction will be easy and its healing will also be quicker."
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	"But when it [the small elbow bone] is fractured on the outer side, its fracture is severe and its healing difficult."
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	"And even worse than that is when both bones are broken together."
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	"Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the small elbow bone at its upper end, then it is advisable for the physician to perform the reduction with ease and gentleness until that [bone] is completely reduced."
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	"But if it is the large elbow bone that is broken, then you must perform the reduction with greater force."
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	"And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply the traction much more forcibly."
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	"And you must keep the figure of the hand in its proper position during the reduction and traction, extending it upon a couch. And let the thumb be placed above all the other fingers, with the little finger below them, and let the patient lie on a pillow."
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	"And place a cushion in front of him at his head or feet so that he does not make any effort."
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	"And then the assistant should extend the arm from the outer side with one hand and hold it there with bandages; another assistant should do likewise above."
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	"And then the physician should gently reduce the bone until he brings it back to its best position."
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	"If there is any displacement of the bone in the fracture, then you must carefully reduce all the displaced fragments back into their proper position with your skill."
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	"If there appears during the reduction any separation of the fragments that pierces the elbow joint and you are not able to reduce it, then proceed as we have said above."
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	"But if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have already spoken about that in another chapter, and therefore I will not discuss its treatment here."
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	"And if an abscess forms at the beginning of your reduction, then you should take a piece of linen smeared with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, of medium thickness between thickness and thinness. Then stretch this linen over it with gentle pressure until the abscess yields. And then remove the cerate and apply a plaster prepared from powdered myrrh with a little honey; and then apply splints; and let the splint that is placed upon that fracture be wide and strong."
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	"And know that the number of splints used for the arm is usually greater in the major positions, either when there is a fracture of one elbow bone or of both bones together."
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	"And then apply the pressure upon the site of the fracture with great force and violence. And if you observe that the traction pulls more on the upper side of the fracture or on the lower side, then apply gentle pressure according to what is written at the beginning of this chapter."
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And let the bandages wrapped around the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough. And let the linen with which it is stretched be of medium thickness between thinness and thickness, as we have recommended."
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	"And observe the limb and the bandage for a few days."
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	"And if any cause arises which requires correction, such as swelling in the limb, then you should immerse the limb in warm water until that swelling ceases."
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	"Then allow the limb to rest without being too tightly bound so that it may recover; and then apply traction again."
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"When the extraction has softened and the bone is dislodged, appearing as such, then correct all this with your power."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"If you find that nutrients are prohibited from reaching the limb due to excess stricture, then soften it a little and allow it to rest for a few days until proper circulation is restored. Then strengthen it."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"However, if the illness has not been caused by any of the conditions mentioned earlier, it should then be released within approximately 20 days or so around that time."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"Then hang the limb of the patient with their own strength and move it agitatedly, and let them sleep on their back."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"Know that this fracture takes 30 or 32 days to heal, but in some cases it heals in 28 days. All of this depends on the complexion and strength of the patient."
Capitol .xiii.	"Chapter XIII"
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	"On the restoration of fractures of the hand and fingers."
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"You should know that in the case of a hand pinch or nutcracker injury to the toes, it is not always fracture but often merely contusion."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	"And when it occurs with fracture or contusion, you should have the patient lie down and place their hand on that extended [arm] at shoulder height."
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	"The minister should then extend the broken bones, and the doctor should align them together with good alignment."
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	"And then you must apply a plaster and cotton, unless there is cauterization to prevent pus. Then place a splint on top according to the size of the location, and wrap it with linen."
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	"But if the fracture is in the bones within the palm of the hand, you should make a bandage like a splint from cloth and tell the patient to press it with their clenched palm. Then wrap it tightly with cloth."
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	"And let the splint be made of leather covered in cloth to allow for elevation, so that the leather can adhere closely to the palm. Then bind it as needed."
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	"But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, you should place splints above and below the joint of the fingers on the palm to allow the hand to be upright and straight. Then bind it as when wrapping a wrist between the fingers."
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	"And if there is a fracture in one of the knuckles, you should align it properly and bind it with the palm. And if desired, place a small splint on the outside to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	"But if the fracture is in another knuckle, such as that of the middle finger or the index finger, ring finger, or little finger, you should align it and bind it with the corresponding finger. Or they can all be bound continuously, which is better. Or place a small splint on top as mentioned for the thumb."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	"And consider, in your treatment, the condition of the wound and its opposite side – with your operation – according to what is necessary when such causes arise, as described in this narrative."
Capitol .xiv.	"Chapter XIV."
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	"On the Treatment of a Fracture of the Bone of the Thigh."
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	"The bone of the thigh is often fractured and it is felt when it becomes displaced at the articulation in front and the pus accumulates above."
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	"And its treatment is done in such a way that the muscle is bound above the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture. And the patient should be made to lie on their stomach and face down."
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	"And then the minister should extend all the muscles to their insertion when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	If the thigh is fractured, then bring the ligament close to the bone at the start of the penis, so that the extension goes downwards, and the other ligament leaves the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the bone is fractured near the knee, then make sure that the ligament is close to the kneecap and the extension goes upwards.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor aligns the bone with both his hands so that it reduces naturally and the bone joins together in good union. Afterwards a plaster cast and bandage are needed to prevent swelling of the limb if there is no suppuration (pus formation).
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if pus forms then allow it to drain for several days until the inflammation has subsided and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The plaster cast should be made in this way: wrap a firm bandage over the fracture and fold it twice or three times, removing any excess material. Then wrap the leg so that it reaches the ankle and thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	Then insert a long strip of adhesive tape between the skin and the plaster cast near the knee joint. The ends of the tape should come out above the two parts of the fracture and then wind them around the plaster cast and leg to remove any excess bandage material.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place a splint on the skin over the location of that fracture, and attach it with a safety pin to the bone of the plaster cast.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then fill in the spaces between the plaster cast and the skin with soft cloths, so that the bandage can set properly.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start with a firm bandage on the middle of the fracture location with three or four turns. The more you wrap around the fracture site, the tighter and stronger the plaster cast will be. But also make sure it is not too tight or too loose, but rather comfortable and moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend both ends of the adhesive tape to the foot and ankle on either side until it reaches the heel of the foot. Then fasten both ends of the safety pin to prevent any movement or slipping of the splint from its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave the plaster cast on until it sets properly, making sure that there is no rubbing or irritation of the skin, nor any inflammation, swelling, or redness. If any of these symptoms do occur, then remove the plaster cast immediately and correct whatever has caused them, following the steps outlined above several times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	If there is any pressure on the bone that causes pain during movement, it is important to try and relieve that pressure as much as possible. If this is not possible, then place a pad over that area and remove any excess plaster cast material that may be causing discomfort. Then follow the steps outlined previously for treating a fracture until it has healed properly.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	Sometimes the plaster cast on the thigh may cause pressure on the fracture site. If this happens, then make sure to adjust the safety pins on both sides of the plaster cast as described in the previous instructions for treating a fractured arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, when treating a fracture in this way, it is important not to cause any limp or hobbling. If the plaster cast is applied incorrectly and the patient has trouble walking after the treatment, then it may be necessary to apply another plaster cast on top of the first one to help stabilize the leg during rehabilitation.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	You should know that the plaster cast remains on for about 40 days or a bit more or less depending on the complexity and other factors of the fracture.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	On the treatment of fractures of the jawbone.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	You should know that fractures of the jawbone are quite common and often occur due to trauma or blows to the face.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	"Yet if it happens that he has a fracture, then it is but a crack or break in his bones, and this is accompanied by pain or no pain, upon which all depends."
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	"And the restoration of it is attempted by placing that which is broken of his bones with the said intestines being united and joined together as much as possible, according to what is easy, simple, and convenient."
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	"And then apply plaster and dressing over that round stone wound if necessary; and strengthen it with a bandage according to what is appropriate."
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	"And consider all the methods which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as with caution and similar care to those, so that it may be applied to every accident according to what is convenient for him, until he is healed."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	"On the restoration of a fracture of the humerus."
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	"You should know that in the arm there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name of the arm, and the other is slender and is called the radius."
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	"And it happens that in some species of fracture the two bones of the arm are affected, and for that reason restoration is made of it just like restoration of the arm altogether, and the operation of it is one."
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	"And if the two bones are broken together, the humerus becomes completely disjointed."
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	"And if only the slender bone is broken, the arm remains articulated at the front."
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"And if only the thick bone is broken, it remains attached to that of below and it is one of those causes which are not easily restored."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"And therefore apply extension, traction, and bandaging of the fragments according to what is appropriate in this case."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"But it happens that if the fracture of the humerus is old and there have been many attempts, then extension should be less and gentler, and alleviate with your skill."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And in the humerus there is one cause for operation on the arm, and this is when you uncover the fragments and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood from the trunk of a tree which has been placed below the causes which are placed beneath it, and made similarly from branches of palm; choose those which have little thickness, and let them not be thick ones, and let their length be according to the length of the humerus, and from one end to the other."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	"And then apply on each splint two wrappings according to its length and place one on the fracture of the humerus on one side and the other on the other side, and they should extend from one end to the other."
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	"And then bind the two fragments in three places at both extremities and in the middle, because with this structure the humerus is prevented from bending to the right or left, and this is good stability."
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	"And then apply a splint of wood according to the length of the humerus, and let it be placed on it so that it conserves its movement."
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	"And more importantly you should do this in fracture, especially when it is properly reduced."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And also consider each day the humerus and study it carefully, and you guard it from hematoma and inflammation or other similar causes. And whenever any of these occurs, then apply what is necessary until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the heel bone and bones of the foot.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The heel bone has not occurred fracture at all; but fractures of the bones of the foot have happened some times; and those of the foot rarely happen, and do not occur except attrition in the joints of position.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if fractures happen to the bones of the foot and some of these bones become elevated above themselves among them, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared in such a way that they can walk.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And around they pause the one foot on what is elevated of those bones, and around they press them, compressing and squeezing them until it returns to its place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And around they apply plaster and bandages on top, and place under the belly of the foot a small table with two flat heads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And around they stretch that member with the foot downwards, because thou hast enveloped it with cloths and for other reasons which thou shalt indicate.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then thou dost untie the bandage, for thou shalt find the bones squeezed together, or pinched, or dislocated, and the operation in those is thus known.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some of them are pinched together, then thou dost restore them and squeeze them thus with oil, and recoat them according to what thou shalt learn in the restoration of these bones of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And around thou dost place the splint on the pinched finger according to its length, and let it be thus on one side a little; and around thou dost place under the foot that table which is recommended to thee, and stretch that member downwards.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if what is pinched of the bones are two or three or more, then thou dost place on each finger separately according to its quantity, wrapped in lion's cloth, and stretch the table under the foot as far down as possible, and let it stand on one of the heads of the table with the belly of the foot upon it, so that it may have good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is necessary for thee that thou dost not forget to not consider all the causes which are mentioned to thee in other fractures of accidents which we have said, and thou dost pause for each accident according to what is appropriate.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of the fracture of the neck of the woman and of the penis bone and of the phallus of man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the woman is pinched together, then thou dost perform that cut in this manner, and thou dost incline it at the joint of the two a little backwards.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the midwife presses the neck with cotton, and let it be done in the neck thus as an arrow; and then the woman is shaken up, and thou dost raise her hips little by little, for all this is forgotten until the neck is before the joint of the bone as an arrow, and the pinched bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then thou dost place powder on the hips, and when she wishes to urinate thou dost remove the cotton with ease and let her urinate, and thou dost reduce it and return it according to the manner in which thou didst first introduce it, and then thou dost return it to its first powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And she shall do thus for seven days or thereabouts, until that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take an ovine bladder and stretch it over the wound of the patient using a reed cannula; then insert the entire bladder into the concavity of the wound, and immediately inflate it with breath through the cannula so that the bladder becomes inflated within the concavity, for the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be filled with cotton and left in place for a few days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	When the bone of the penis in a man or woman is broken, at that time administer to its restoration and suturing the liquid that we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and little endeavors, especially from him to whom some study and use of this my book are given; for that fracture indicates to you the greatest dispositions towards a straight restoration and tightening of it, therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the case of a broken penis in a man, take a guaiacum gum, and place it inside the penis; then wrap it with cloth wrapping and leave it wrapped for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of fractures of the bones when they are dislocated.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is convenient for him who has suffered a fracture with dislocation, and especially if the bone is large like that of the thigh or shoulder blade, etc., to perform a flebotomy at once if the conditions for flebotomy are present in him as we have said above.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the dislocation flows with blood, it is necessary that you attend to its retention in such a way that you powderize over it zeugitris cut, if there is no other cause.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And also begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has healed, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day of all, for you will cause bad accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin openly, then it is necessary for you to perforate and reduce it with your hands with ease and little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if extension is not prepared for you and the equating of it with your hands is difficult, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits and its width according to the quantity of the dislocation. And for that reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of them according to the quantity required in this cure in all kinds of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And let it be reduced, and let there be little hardness on it so that it is not doubled; then place pressure on it at the time of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And let there be an acute extremity on which margin is made in its extremities; and let it be thicker above than below, and larger inside the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem," that is, a little shovel.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	For it must be paused on the elevated acute extremity of the bone on which the prominence is made.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And insert it in one stroke until the bone returns and is equated with some pressure.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And then force the ends of the fracture together with some equating, and if the end of the broken bone is thin and does not receive the instrument well, then insert the end of that bone until the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely with what we have recommended, then cut it with one of the knives which we have mentioned, or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then rasp that which remains on the bone of its sharpness and small rough edges.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and the pain afterwards becomes very violent suddenly, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place. And therefore do this in order that you may relieve the patient greatly.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your reduction of the bone is completed, then immerse a cloth in black treacle and apply it properly if it is summer time, and do not put on the dislocation cerote or any other oil lest corruption and putrefaction occur later.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And apply plasters at the time of your completion of the reduction of the bone, and leave the dislocation uncovered enough that you insert the splint with forceps and use bandages according to the quantity of the dislocation.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And beware with all care that you do not stretch the dislocation with the fracture, for many times foolish physicians have done this and caused harm to their patients through death or consuming corruption or sudden death. Therefore be healthy.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your splint is light, soft, different from the splints of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	If the inflammation is large or severe, and you fear any of the unfortunate accidents that we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then do not place your hand on those stones, but instead use a wrap of hard cloth there and press it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When the inflammation has begun to decrease after one or two days and pus has formed there, then remove the cloth that you had placed on it. Then apply compresses, using those with which we usually treat inflammations, such as tetrafarmacon and similar ones.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	You should also remove the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it has healed and is firm. And make sure that the limb is positioned in such a way that pus can flow from there to its lower parts with ease.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If several days have passed and the wound has not healed nor has the pus separated from it, then you should know that there is something wrong here. In this case, it is necessary to examine the wound with a tent (i.e., use a probe or exploratory incision).
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those things that are separated, remove and extract them. But if there are some that cannot be separated and they cause the limb to swell and give pain, then proceed to incise them according to what seems possible to you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if pus or ichor (blood) comes out of the wound, this is called stomatitis, or another type of corruption and putrefaction. In this case, you should pause for a moment and consider the care of that which has been described in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And as to that in which my speech must be concise and you make your choice: when the bone is crushed, it rises above the limb just like the bone of the foot and helper bones, and similarly those of the large limbs. And do not attempt its attraction nor its extraction because many times death has occurred due to this; rather leave that alone until pus forms, for after about 20 or 30 days it will fall out on its own. Then treat the wound if you can see it, otherwise leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of swelling that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This swelling often occurs at the site of fracture healing, especially near joints, and distorts the shape of the limb. It often prevents the limb from functioning properly.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Then consider if the swelling is recent and apply to it medicines that have astringent properties like aloevera (aloe), sage, myrtle, rue, and similar ones. Take some or all of these and mix them with stiptic wine, egg albumin, or vinegar, then spread this on a piece of linen and bind it tightly over the swelling.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And let this dressing remain undisturbed for several days. Then remove it and apply another one until the swelling has been removed. Or place over that a lead plate (lamina of lead) descended in the middle, for lead has the property of reducing all swellings in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already become hard and it is necessary to remove it carefully, then cut it open along its upper surface, excise the excess tissue, or scrape it away with some curettes until it is removed. Then treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	De la curacio de fractura del cap.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	"When a fracture has been restored and yet the limb remains fragile and does not follow its natural course."
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When a bone fracture has been healed, and yet the limb remains fragile, this may happen for various reasons. One of them is too much solution in the liquid and ligaments, which do not follow what is necessary; or due to an excess of tension in the ligaments, preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or due to excessive embrocation; or due to movement at a time other than its usual one; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness."
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"To cure this, feed the patient and make their heart tender so that blood may be multiplied in them; administer baths; and apply gauze and ointment on it."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"And especially avoid applying pressure on the limb, so that the pressure does not draw away nourishment from it; or continue rubbing it with warm water mixed with pitch, until nutrition returns to its natural state."
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII:"
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"Of the cure of broken bones that have healed crookedly, and how to operate on them if necessary."
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"When it happens to a limb that has already healed crookedly and unevenly at the site of the fracture and node formation, even though the limb is not entirely useless in terms of its natural operation, do not accept the claim of someone who says that limb was recently fractured."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"But many foolish physicians and restorers have done this in our land, and this operation is most reprehensible, leading to great fear among those who bear its mark, which is deadly."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if the limpness and node formation are recent, then it is necessary to rub them with warm water mixed with herbs that soften, such as aleatory flowers, rue seeds, mallows, and similar ones; and to make a plaster with a softening plaster like dulled lead well-made; or to take the juice of rue seeds and mix it with egg yolk or olive oil, and apply it on them; or to take fatty figs and grind them with pigeon dung, and similar medicines that are called amulets for consolidation."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes it is dissolved with persistent light friction, especially with the most humid ones, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in every hour."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if the crookedness has already become hardened and turned into bone, and it is necessary to operate on it with iron, then it is necessary to cut off what is above it and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and incise whatever is superfluous from the node that has grown there with fine scissors, and facilitate movement in that limb with diligence and care."
Capitol .xxiii.	"Chapter XXIII:"
De sermo en dislocacio.	"Of discourse on dislocation."
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	"Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of its location, which hinders movement and alters the shape of the limb, causing great pain and injury."
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	"So when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible and not delay reducing it, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hardened, making the reduction of dislocation difficult."
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	"And for this reason it is not necessary to move or stretch in the hour of inflammation, because many times it brings about spasm and severe pains."
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	"But when this happens, it is necessary that you go to the surgery of the sick person and let him rest until the inflammation subsides, and then rub the limb with warm water and oil, and reduce it gently."
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	"And all limbs should be treated with that which brought about their dislocation."
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	"And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what has been stated in fracture; from the most superior part of the body down to the most inferior."
Capitol .xxiiii.	"Chapter XXIV:"
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw."
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	"So when both mandibles are dislocated but not displaced; and the dislocation of both is done in one of two ways: either they are moved slightly from their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, until they are softened at the joint where saliva flows, so that he cannot have it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his throat."
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	"But when the dislocation of him is slight, then with most dispositions it returns by itself without any cause."
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	"However, if the dislocation is complete and severe, then gentle reduction should be administered promptly, without delay."
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"Then, the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert their finger(s) into the dislocation of the jaw inside the patient's mouth, either with one finger if the dislocation is on one side, or both fingers if it's on both sides. The others holding the patient's hands outside should support them evenly; then tell the patient to relax their jaw and let go of any tension from each side. The doctor will then gently reposition the jaw until it returns to its proper place."
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	"However, if reduction is difficult, especially when both jawbones are dislocated at once, then evaporation with boiled water and oil should be administered to facilitate easy reduction without delay."
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	"Once reduction is achieved and the mouth is closed but not yet softened, then apply a poultice of linen cloth with wax and rose oil on it. Ensure that it's well melted and softened to facilitate easy application."
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	"And have the patient sleep on their back with their head between two pillows to prevent them from turning their head either to the right or left side. Do not force them to eat anything until they feel better and their jaws are comfortable again."
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	"And with this treatment, it should be easy for the patient to open their mouth for eating, drinking and speaking until their jaw is fully healed."
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	"And if the reduction of two dislocated jawbones is difficult and they do not return to their proper places at once, then it often happens that fevers occur and there is frequent thirst. Sometimes the abdomen becomes quite distended, and sometimes vomiting occurs."
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	"And when this happens, you should know that it is a sign of great danger. Many times the patient dies within ten days."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter XXV."
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	"On the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle."
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	Fork not displaced from inside due to its connection with the foot; sometimes it is displaced at the outer part, which is evident by touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of this is for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Next, tightly press the lock with your palm using strong pressure, as it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And next apply this plaster and powders, and then strengthen that area.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the end of that which seizes the bone and continues with it is not displaced on any day; therefore it must be reduced and aligned according to what we have said, and according to how you prepare it.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And next apply this plaster, powders, and bandage, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter .xxvi
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the departure of the tendon from the bone.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second way is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this is rarely done; and it is not dislocated at the posterior parts by the shoulder; nor is it dislocated at the anterior parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And more often it is dislocated and protruded at the lower parts near the tendon, especially in those with little flesh, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And sometimes it happens to some men that by a blow or fall, the muscle becomes inflamed with an incurable inflammation, and is caught in such a way that it has already been dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore you must first prepare for this before you begin treating him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the lower parts near the tendon; therefore you must distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, for there is a clear difference between them. You will find in the head of the muscle a concavity below the tendon, and the touch of the head of the muscle will be like that of a hen's egg, and the patient cannot put his hand to his ear, nor can he move it in any way.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated at the foot or above, you will immediately find a palpable touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation can be easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the practitioner elevates the patient's hand to the upper part; and with his thumb presses below the tendon of it, and elevates the junction with force upwards to its place, and the practitioner elevates the patient's hand, and extends it upwards; and then he presses it down again for it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return by what we have said, and many days have passed since the dislocation happened, then the patient must be bathed in hot water and administered a liniment that softens and lubricates like this: decoction of comfrey root, althea, fenugreek, and mallow in water. This should be given to drink.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is propped up on his back and pressed down below the tendon of it until it is well engaged between traction and compression, and then the physician places his heel on the sphere (i.e. a round object), and elevates the head of the muscle with force, pulling the patient's hand so that it does not hinder from below, and another assistant holds the patient's head so that it does not hinder from below, for immediately it returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish to reduce it in this way: have present a man who is longer than the patient and on the same side of him; let him place his muscle below the tendon of the dislocated one and elevate the tendon upwards while the patient is suspended in air, and another assistant pulls the patient's hand downwards from below his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light in weight, then another cause must be suspended from him to weigh him down, for the dislocation returns immediately.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced easily in this way: place on the ground a long pole with a rounded head like a pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and let the patient be placed upon it; then lay him down upon cloths, and let him stand along the length of the pole, and extend his arm below the other side; and stretch out his body from the other side with force, for the junction returns to its place with great speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: take a pole of which the length is two braccia, and the width four digits, and let its thickness be level with the tendon in this way:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"And place lion's skin cloth over the head to prevent contagion of the illness."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"And then pause the movement of the illness, and extend your hand or arm inside the joints, and let the hand rest on the helper's chest."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"And then place your arm on the rung of a ladder according to its width, and extend your hand inside it, and hang the other side from the other side, for the junction is almost complete."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	"And when the insertion is completed in every possible way, then pause the trembling with wool of equal quantity; and now apply a prepared plaster of powdered myrrh mixed with albumen of eggs over all the muscle, so that it may be turned upwards, and then strengthen the trembling with appropriate bandage; and let the ligament be turned over the plaster, and the hand of him be attached to his neck, and let it be released, and do not move his hand for seven days."
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	"And the food of the patient should be paused little by little, until the member is strengthened, because it is easier to heal when it is lighter."
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	"And then gradually increase the food after seven or nine days and exercise the movement; and when it is firm and not softened anymore, then it is healed."
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	"But if the junction is displaced many times due to humidity that occurs in him or for other causes, then it is necessary to apply cautery with three traughts in that place, according to what was said before in the chapter of cautery."
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	"And if even so it is done and after seven days the ligament is loosened and the junction is not firm, and the plaster and bandage are reduced upon him several times, and still it is not firm and caught, and he cannot raise that arm above his head, then know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are either cut or stretched or softened, and know that the junction will never be fixed in its place."
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	"For the dislocation of that which is done, you must place the foot and knee or the buttocks behind, and the reduction is done with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns."
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then apply the other bandage to that one, and care for it until it is healed."
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	"And if it happens that there is heaviness in the member and slowness in its movement during recovery, then the patient should use baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its first nature."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	"Do you know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns to its place with difficulty? And when it is dislocated forward or backward, it cannot be concealed from you if you examine it visually or by touch according to any figure that may have been dislocated. When you reduce the dislocated hip into its place, this is clearly indicated to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor reach itself with that muscle."
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	"And you should cut it and reduce the dislocation before an abscess appears because if an abscess appears, reducing it is difficult, and the wound will not heal completely. And especially when it is dislocated backwards because this type of dislocation is worse than all others, causing great pain, and often death ensues from it."
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	"And the reduction of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand should be extended with two hands, and the arm should be abducted, and the doctor's hands should be placed on the joint and around it, and he should push the joint back into place with the ulnar sides of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm so that it returns to its place."
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	"But if the dislocation is anterior, then it returns as follows: by flexing the hand on its own, strike the joint with the edge of your palm."
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	"And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and great force."
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	"And it is that two assistants should extend the arm, and hold it strongly with two hands so that it is not moved back during extension."
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	"And moreover, let the arm be rotated medially throughout because a rolled-up bandage or cloth, long enough to wrap around the hand of the patient, should be used."
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	"And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that it may facilitate the causes which help the lubricity of the joint with ease. And moreover, he should push the joint back into place with strong pressure until it returns."
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	"And moreover, the reduction of it should be maintained by placing pressure on it with a compress in which stypticum and caustic are mixed with albumen of egg white. And let it be fixed with descending suspensory bandage, and let the arm be suspended from the neck for some days."
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	"And moreover, it should be released. And then if the joint is formed in its place, then release the bandage and leave it alone."
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	"And if you see that the joint is not strong, then repeat the compress and bandage, and leave it alone for some days until it is extended. And moreover, release it."
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	"But if there is gravity towards the reduction of the joint and its position is in movement, then apply humidification in bath and gentle friction, compression until it is alleviated. Or else place a compress on the joint that is moistened with olive oil so that it may be a greasy matter. And moreover, let it be wrapped, and leave it alone over the bone during the day and night."
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	"And then remove that compress and place the limb in a warm bath. And when it is swollen, then rub the joint with moderate friction, and again apply compresses moistened with olive oil once or twice or three times."
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	"while in the bath until it becomes flexible."
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	"And if you wish, apply to it a moistened and heated cowhide with its border thickened and strap it on tightly. And do this several times until that is humidified and reduced to its proper position."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade, that is of the joint between the arm and the hand."
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	"The shoulder blade of the hand sometimes becomes dislocated and its reduction is easy compared to other joints, but nevertheless it should be reduced as soon as possible so that it does not become inflamed or infected."
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And the reduction of the dislocation is this: place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and have the minister extend the hand of that one. And the doctor should place his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and push it until it returns to its proper place."
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	"But it should be considered whether the palm has already been opened to the front of the hand. If so, then have the patient place the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is preceding, then have the position of the patient's hand inward on the table so that the doctor's hand may fit over that prominence of the joint."
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	"And then if it returns quickly, that is good. And if not, then apply compresses moistened with oil to reduce the inflammation and leave it alone. And do not repeat this unless there are signs of reduction after several days."
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	"But the joint moves according to its tortuosity. And do not tell the patient any cause other than that the hand is weakened and cannot move for some reason. Then you should know that the nerves are pinched or torn, and then it is not in its proper place but it must be reduced with cautery near its entrance and strongly done several times until it regains strength."
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	"So when the dislocation is returned to its proper place, then apply compresses as we have recommended and let it be left alone for five days. And then release it and let it be left alone while exercising the hand of that one."
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	"But if there is loss of movement and some gravity occurs in it, then apply cold water compresses with friction several times until it is alleviated."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of these (fingers)."
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	"Sometimes these are dislocated entirely."
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	"And when some of these fingers are dislocated on the back or front of the hand, then straighten the finger and reduce its dislocation with your thumb and index finger until it returns to place."
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	"And after that, support the head of the finger; suspend it from the part where it is dislocated for two days."
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	"And next suspend that one and extend him so that his right side may be equated in that same day."
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	"And when it is time, read this second account to him and do not cease to untie him during the day and exercise him with movements, and tie him at night; and do this for a few days until he is straight."
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	"And do the same if it is dislocated at the navel of the hand, and read this account to that part and make the first operation your initial action until he is healed."
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	"And similarly do this when other parts are dislocated."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	"Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	"When dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and some of them are removed from their places, then there is no cure for it because death ensues."
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	"And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the sick person is involuntary and he cannot retain it; many times some members are softened on one side or both sides of the body, or both arms or one of them; or one vertebra is removed from its place, because many times they are removed and many times their removal is made in four directions."
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	"Therefore that one is already removed from the parts behind and it is called 'gelbozitat'."
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	"But the cure for this is to consider if the 'gelbozitat' occurs in childhood, because then there is no cure nor healing of it at all."
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	"But in those cases that occur by chance or by percussion or by similar causes, the Ancients have already spoken at length about the ways of cure with their words, which is the most profitable; but I have abbreviated that one because a little excused the excess of it, due to my proximity to my intention of exposition, with which I have exposed and formed this from that diverse instrument with which I will show this and explain it."
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	"And I say that in 'gelbozitat' that occurs at the front part of the foot, there is neither cure nor healing for it; and similarly in those that are made on two sides."
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	"And only that one is cured which occurs properly at the back with what I have mentioned."
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	"And it is that the sick person should lie on his face close to a wall and be extended with his hands alongside him so that his foot is not injured."
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	"And properly a straight stick should be placed on the ground at the end of the foot near the head of the sick person, and another stick on either side of his feet at the other end of the foot."
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	"And the minister should hold one stick firmly without letting it go out of place; and another minister should hold the other according to that form."
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly wrap the head of the sick person with soft cloths and tie them firmly; and extend one end of the cloth to the stick that is placed near his head and attach it there; and properly stretch another cloth over his hips on either side of him and place it below his thighs; and properly adjust all the cloths and attach them to the other stick that is placed below his feet."
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	"And properly each minister should extend the cloth to its place on the stick; and let not the two sticks and their cloths be moved from their places where they were placed, but yet not fixed as we have said."
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	"And the doctor should place his palms on the back with strength until it returns, or he should place one table there and properly adjust his feet on the table until it returns."
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	"But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three brazas, and dig in the wall that we have said is near the sick person a place where one end of the table can be inserted."
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	"And properly place the middle of the table on the back; and the doctor should place his feet on the other end and stretch well until the back is contracted and returns to its place."
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	"And if you wish, open with a turn using your hand; and it is that you should lie on the ground near the head of the sick person between the two sticks at the end of his foot, each stick being one palm long, and already done in each stick a groove where the cord can run through, and each should be firmly planted in the ground so that they are not moved."
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	"And let there be another round stick on which the cord is placed, and it should be turned in the two grooves of the two sticks."
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	"And at one end of it is a groove in which the stick is formed, whose length is one palm with what has been turned; and the other two sticks have the same."
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly stretch the cloths that you have stretched on the foot of the sick person in the groove that is placed near his head, and the cloths that you have stretched over his hips in the cord that is placed below his feet."
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	"And properly place one minister on each cord who should turn the cord with his hand; and the doctor should straighten the back as we have said."
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	"And this is the form of the turn:"
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	"And properly after the back has returned and the place is straightened, then you should put dry plaster with alum of egg white, and also cotton; and properly place it on the plaster like a table whose width is about three fingers or around those, and its length is as much as takes up the place of the inflammation, and on top of the back."
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	"And properly tie it with cloths that we have mentioned, and use the sick person subtly nutritious food until he is healed."
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	"And if there is still some inflammation in the place at the end of healing, then medicines that soften and cleanse should be administered with the application of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already lead plate has been applied to that place."
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	"And sometimes inflammation occurs at the end of the spine of the two hips, which is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone that already inflames so much that there should not be any pressure applied to it with this medicine, for strong force will cause your death."
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxxi.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the treatment of a dislocated hip joint.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the thigh muscle should never be dislocated except in dislocation alone, and it does not happen as those that happen with other joints of small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways: it is dislocated inwardly at its inner parts, or outwardly at its outer parts, or anteriorly at its front parts, or posteriorly at its rear parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	It is most commonly dislocated inwardly and less often anteriorly or posteriorly.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	A sign of its dislocation inwardly is that when you stretch the healthy leg against the sick leg, it becomes longer and the knee is more prominent than in the healthy one; the sick person cannot bend his foot towards the shin, and this place where the shin should be pressed against feels numb due to a blood blister having formed there.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	The sign of that which happens with dislocation at its outer parts is that the symptoms of it are opposite to this symptom.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of that which happens with dislocation at its front parts is that when the sick leg is stretched out completely, it does not bend again due to pain in the knee; and if he tries to go forward, he cannot do so; his urine is retained and his gait is limping, and his walking is done on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	"He who has experienced dislocation of the posterior hip joint will not extend his leg nor bend it forward without grimacing; the thigh is shortened compared to the other, and the joint is softened, with the head of the bone displaced in that region."
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	"If you reduce the species of this dislocation by considering whether it is old and chronic, and if you then attempt reduction according to its position, but there is no improvement in that treatment, then further traction is not necessary for such a case."
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	"If in the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four species of dislocation, you will have need to reduce the joint, extend the hip internally and externally, move it to the right and left, for often it returns quickly and no other treatment is necessary."
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	"If it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a powerful traction and extend the thigh from its outer side, either by itself or by a band which is tied above the hip joint; and another assistant should extend the arm of that person upwards so that they may grasp his toes with their hands; and finally, strongly pull the band downwards over the sacrum, while another assistant holds the end of the band."
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	"And let this extension be from the outer side to the angle at the head of the femur, or from behind to the trochanter."
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	"And let this extension be done all at once while the patient is lying on their back and holding their breath."
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	"And this type of traction is common to all four species."
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	"Therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good. But if not, then according to its own nature it will be necessary to apply the specific treatment for each species."
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	"In the reduction of its own kind, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is towards the inside, then let the patient be placed on their left side. Then place the band over the sacrum at that point where it lies between the head of the femur and the point which is lateral to the greater trochanter. And extend the band upwards from the side of the hip joint to its upper limit."
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	"And then another assistant shall strongly grasp the thighs of the patient and gently pull on the dislocation towards its outer side with a sudden extension, for that will return it to its proper place."
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	"And this is the easiest method by which this member can be reduced compared to other species."
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	"But if it remains on its outer side and does not obey the entrance with this method alone, then both hips of the patient must be tied together with a strong, light band placed above both ankles and knees."
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	"And let the length of each be four digits, and let the band be extended more on the side of the dislocation by two digits."
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	"And then have the patient suspended from a beam overhead and let him hang downwards. And let the length of it from the ground be two cubits."
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And then command a strong youth to grasp the head of the thighbone and let him suspend himself with the patient. And let another youth forcibly push on the thighbone, for the joint will quickly return to its proper place."
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	"But in the reduction of its own kind, when it is dislocated outwards, let the patient lie on their stomach as we have recommended previously. And let the band be placed properly over the side of the dislocation and over the foot."
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	"And then two beams shall be placed, one at the foot of the patient and the other at the head. And another beam fitted to the middle of the thigh shall be placed upon which wet cloths are wrapped so that the patient is not hurt by it being between his thighs, for otherwise the extension towards its outer side would be impaired."
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	"And then each assistant shall extend their respective parts and the physician with his hand shall guide the reduction according to the art."
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	"Therefore, if it does not return spontaneously, then place him in that position with care and so do as we have said in dislocation."
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	"But the patient must lie quietly on their side."
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	"But when the dislocation is towards its front, then let the limb be gently extended and this is how it is done on the thigh. And the physician places his right palm over the hip joint of the patient, and then grasping that with one hand he extends it outwards to the point where it joins the knee."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	"But when the dislocation is towards its back, then let not the limb be extended outwards and let it be raised up from the ground. For it should rest on a hard surface, just as it should if its ankle were dislocated outwards, according to what we have said concerning that joint resting on two ankles; and thus he lies on his face with the bandages extended as we have described."
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	"And compression must be administered by placing a board upon the place where the joint is dislocated."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	"Therefore, when the reduction is completed as it should be - and the sign of its reduction will not be hidden from you, which is when you extend both thighs of the patient, and when you move those joints and the patient flexes his thigh and expands it without difficulty, then you shall know that the limb has been returned properly. And then you shall apply two splints and bind them with a bandage so that the ankle does not move in any direction; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days."
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	"And then untie the bandages and splints and compare one thigh with the other."
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	"Therefore, if you move those joints freely, then you shall know that the dislocation is healed, and then let the patient go."
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	"But if you see any sign of laxity, then return and splint it again, and extend it according to your first method for three days."
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	"And then untie that and let the patient walk slowly for a few days until he is strengthened."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter XXXII"
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of the knee joint."
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	"The knee joint is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outwards, inwards, and outwards more than backwards; but it cannot be dislocated forwards."
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	"The sign of dislocation of the knee joint is that when you tell the patient to apply their thigh against it, they know that the knee joint is dislocated."
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	"And the reduction of all kinds of its dislocation is that you make the patient lie on their right side so that they can extend their thigh if possible. Then adhere your two hands to his face and place his foot between your feet. And then press his knee joint with your palms, retaining it there between your fingers with force, and another assistant shall extend his foot until the knee joint returns to its place."
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	"The sign of reduction of the knee joint is that his thigh adheres to it with ease and without difficulty."
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then splint that and make the thigh adhere to it. And then bind them together with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie them."
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	"And let not the patient walk for several days until he is healed and strengthened."
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	"But if reduction of it to you is difficult, then apply strong extension with the bandages mentioned in the previous chapter on the treatment of hip dislocation."
Capitol .xxxiii.	"Chapter 33."
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	"About the treatment of ankle dislocation."
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes becomes displaced by slight injury and sometimes becomes dislocated entirely; this dislocation occurs either inwards or outwards.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of ankle dislocation is that it often swells at the part where it has been dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of ankle dislocation is easy: namely, that it should be gently reduced and returned to its place without difficulty.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of ankle dislocation when it is entirely dislocated, one should make the patient lie on their back and have someone strong and capable press on the middle part of the heel from behind.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And thus you should hold with your right hand on the upper part of the heel and with your left hand on the lower part near the ankle bone.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the heel towards you with your right hand and press on it twice with your left hand, and extend it with your left hand; then push the sole of the foot up against your knee without any effort.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And perform this twice as we have said before
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then push the sole of the foot up against your knee for the third time and you are at the ankle bone.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if the foot returns in one or two attempts by this method, and if the foot swells, that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation until the foot returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if you are unable to perform the reduction of the foot by this method that we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground and take a strong stick and place it between the toes of the affected foot, binding the end with cloth so that the foot does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the assistant should hold the patient's toes, and another assistant should extend the foot with their hands or with a bandage placed around the heel of the foot; and each assistant should extend against extension of his own part, while keeping the stick extended between the toes of the affected foot, so that the skin of the foot is not drawn towards its outer parts during extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy foot at its outer parts because the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you confirm that the reduction is complete, then apply plasters and bind the foot strongly with bandages, and tie it to the knee.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful or guard against the nerves which are located behind the heel bone, because if you bind too tightly in that area it may cause pain and injury.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave him for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes damp, change it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	"And on the third day or fourth, untie it and forbid the patient from consuming wine for 40 days."
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	"But if it is necessary to go before that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, especially because it does not receive treatment."
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	"And if an abscess occurs from the cautery, then you must apply to its cavity what was described earlier in this narrative, namely another place for cure and embrocation, until it is removed."
Capitol .xxxiiii.	"Chapter XXXIV."
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the said hips."
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	"It is necessary that one who has been dislocated be laid down gently with little extension without moving him; and that it should not be difficult, bending his knees slightly."
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	"But if the dislocation is in some of the joints of the thighbone, then you should cause the patient to sit with his bad leg stretched out on the ground or on a table, and he should remain thus as if walking."
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	"And then you should stand on one leg, and place your thighbone on what seems like the joints, and then press it with your foot with force until it returns to its proper position. Be careful that it has returned correctly and does not appear at the prominence of the joint."
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	"And then place the thigh of that leg on a table that takes up all the leg, with two ends, and stretch it moderately and firmly for three days; then remove the splint and let him rest from walking for several more days until he is strengthened and his recovery is assured."
Capitol .xxxv.	"Chapter XXXV."
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	"On the types of dislocation that are done with pleasure or with fracture or each one separately."
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	"When some of these causes occur, and you strive to treat the dislocation and restore it, often you will meet with death."
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"And therefore it is not fitting that anyone should presume on the treatment of such cases, but rather one who is skilled in the art, experienced, merciful and compassionate, careful, not hasty or presumptuous; and let him use medicines at first that will only draw out putrid matter, and leave the patient to divine judgment, not hoping for health from destruction, but rather alleviation of the disease, where there appears some hope."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	"And therefore strive at once to reduce it at the beginning of the cause before putrid matter forms."
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	"And then if the limb returns as we desire, then administer regimen that will draw out putrid matter and cure the inflammation with what is suitable for him of dry remedies."
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	"And if dislocation occurs with fracture and the bones are separated, then strive to reduce them, doing what we have said in simple cases that precede this."
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	"And guard and avoid entering into the paths of fear according to what has been preceded by my prediction; for this is better for you that you owe your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your true body in its time."
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	"So end the words of Albucasis, may God bless them perfectly."
Amen.	"Amen."
