Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Al-Bukhary
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O children, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, it seems to me that by its completion and explanation, I fulfill my promise to you with this treatise on surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the practice of surgery is almost unknown in our region and time, it is feared that this science will be lost, its traces will disappear, and only a few small descriptions will remain in the books of the Ancients. But these are obscure and their meaning is difficult to understand.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive this with a treatise arranged in such a way as to explain, clarify and abbreviate; and also include illustrations of the forms of cautery tools and other instruments used in the operation, both for addition to the explanation and preparation of the subject matter.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why skilled surgeons are not found in our time is that the art of medicine is lengthy and requires its practitioner to be well versed in the science of anatomy before attempting surgery. One must know the arrangement of the limbs, the forms of their joints and separations; the number and function of bones, nerves, and ligaments; and the location of arterial and venous pulsation points.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	"Thus says Hippocrates that in name it is small, but in work it is great, especially in the art of the hand."
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	"But we have already spoken of this at the beginning of this book; for whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy will not avoid falling into error which often causes the death of men, as I have seen too many times, since some are formed in this science but lack knowledge and experience."
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	"I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who incised an aphemphous abscess on the neck of a woman, cutting some arteries in the process, causing so much blood to flow that the woman suddenly died between her sheets."
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	"And I saw another physician who, shortly after removing a stone from a man in his urinary state, and the stone was large, he tore part of the bladder with it, causing that man to die on the third day."
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	"And I had already warned him not to do so, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the state of the illness, I knew right away that he would die."
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	"And I saw another physician who received payment of one ducat from our land for surgery, and he came to treat a black man who had a broken thighbone. And through his ignorance, the physician put splints on it with bandages and braces too tightly, not allowing space for respiration."
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	"And he released him according to his desires, and then left him, leaving him like that for some days and ordering that the bandages not be removed. And thus it was until the thighbone and flesh became putrid, resulting in harm."
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	"And I was called to him, and I prepared to remove the bandages, and thus tranquility returned and he recovered from his pain."
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	"But however, corruption had already become established in the member, so that I could not prevent it, and corruption did not cease to wander through the member until the patient died."
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	"And I saw another physician who punctured a cancerous boil, and it became ulcerated some days later, during which time the evil of it increased with the patient."
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	"The reason is that black bile is pure of humor, so it should not be cauterized with fire at all, but rather it should be treated with members which suffer from heat."
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	"And for that reason, my children, it is necessary that the operation be divided into two parts: one is the operation which is associated with health, and one is the work in which there is danger in the greatest dispositions."
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	"And I have already spoken about this in all parts of this book where operation is mentioned which contains error and fear. Therefore, it is necessary for you to observe this and leave that, so that the foolish may not find an opportunity to speak and dishonor you."
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	"And therefore take your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and your illnesses with patience and firmness."
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	"And use the best way through the grace of God to achieve salvation and blessed success, and leave behind terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and bear your weapons against that which causes you fear, so that you may not waver in your faith and in your name: for more remains to your glory, both here and hereafter, and your sanctity."
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	"Because it has already been said in some of my books:"
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"'Do not treat an illness that you do not know, lest you be called a bad physician.'"
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	"And I have already divided this book according to three chapters."
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	"Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part."
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	"The first chapter deals with the head in its forms of instruments and cautery irons, and what is necessary for the operation."
La divisio de la segonda partida.	"The division of the second part."
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The second chapter, on stitching and puncturing, leeching, cupping, extracting arrows and similar things, all organized according to the forms of instruments."
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"Division of the third part."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	"The third chapter, on reduction and dislocation, and the cure of torsion and similar things; this chapter deals with the head in its weights and forms of instruments."
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	"On cautery by fire and sharp medicine, and a reminder of the operation."
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	"And with that begins the treatise of this entire book."
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	"It is necessary for me to say what are the virtues of that cautery and its harms, and in which complexion cautery is prohibited."
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	"Therefore I say that the discourse on the virtue of cautery and its harm is long and prolix, subtle in science, and secretly hidden; many wise men have already spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and it suffices me to mention a little of their discourses for fear of lengthiness."
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	"And therefore I say that cautery confers benefit to all complexions universally, whether they have matter or not, except for two complexions which are without matter."
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	"In the complexion that is cold and dry with matter there will be disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial to it, and others say the contrary, that cautery is not suitable for an illness that is caused by quality and dryness, because nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is not fitting that an illness that is cold and dry with matter should be healed with something hot and dry."
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	"And he who says the contrary of this, that cautery brings benefit to all cold and dry illnesses that occur in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of man and its humidity with the complexion of fire, you find the body of man inferior."
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	"And I say according to what he says, that experience has already proven this to me on several occasions."
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	"But nevertheless it is not necessary to elaborate on this subject that has already been discussed and exercised in the chapter on cautery at length, and after having studied the diversity of complexion in men and the disposition of illnesses in their members, their causes, accidents, and the space of time for each."
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	"But in other complexions there is no cause for fear, especially in hot and humid illnesses, because all physicians agree on these and are not in disagreement about the benefit of cautery in them."
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	"And know, my son, that the secret of curing by fire cautery and its goodness consists in cautery with combustible medicine, because fire is simple and its action only reaches to the member being cauterized, and does not reach another member nearby except with slight harm."
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"But the action of combustible medicine reaches to that which it touches, and strong heat can bring about an illness in a nearby member that is difficult to heal, and strong heat also exits."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	"But fire, because of its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do anything except superfluously. And this is already known to us through experience and long study of the art with regard to the truth of causes; and for this reason I am excused from lengthening the discussion. And if it were not that my book has not yet been read in this place, you would find hidden here a secret about fire and the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would sharpen your understanding."
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and they place the best time in spring."
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	"I say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the judgment of that which is drawn with the cautery, and even more if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fixed, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared from those that come malice, which is greater than small entering harm."
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	"And do not count on yourselves, O children, for that is not esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors, since it is believed that any illness that is healed by cautery is a lasting remedy, and they pause at that consequence."
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	"And the cause is not as they believe because cautery is only a substitute for medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humors, which are the cause of pains."
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	"But however, cautery is superfluous over medicine because of the will of its virtue and operation and the greatness of its Lord."
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"And it is possible that his illness will return at some time in the future, depending on the complexion of the sick person and the location of their illness, and its virtue and what is prepared in their body from the accumulation of superfluities therein, and what they have acquired through food and similar causes; but if an illness for which cautery has been administered is a subtle one in a member with few superfluities and humors, like cautery of teeth for pain or similar things, it is possible that this pain will not return, but it is done little."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	"And more commonly it is said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, for they believe that there is no cure that profits either with medicine or with any other cause besides cautery."
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	"And the reason is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when other remedies have been tried in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and therefore cautery is administered at the end, and it profits for that."
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	"And here it is said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention understood by the common people and many foolish doctors."
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	"And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	"And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, which is not absolutely true, for I have seen and proven that this is only so in certain bodies without others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but nevertheless when you heat cautery with fire with gold it is not declared to you, because it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the roughness of gold, and prepares to receive a burn; and if you adjust the ignition it melts the gold by the fire, and some sheets fall into the fire so that the artist catches them in his occupation."
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	"And for this reason cautery with iron is done more lightly and more gently with regard to the correctness of the operation."
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	"And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and those of the head within the weights, so that later when asking for something from it you may easily find what you want."
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	"On cautery for headache due to coldness and humidity."
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cautery confers upon the skin humidity and coldness; its accidental cause is due to two things: namely, heat and excessive flow of phlegm, called catarrh, which flows from the head down to the eyes and ears, causing excessive sleepiness, toothache and throat pain, and generally speaking, all diseases that arise from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, etc., and similar ones.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	Firstly, you should command the patient to purge with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on what you judge appropriate according to the severity of their illness and their age and constitution.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and have him sit on a large bench covered with a sheet, with his face turned upwards.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then place the cautery of your palm just above the tip of their nose between their eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But first, when you have arrived at that point with your finger, mark it with a pen and then light the olive-oil cautery which is in this shape:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then place it on the marked spot so that it descends gently, pressing down little by little until you feel the heat. Then twist it slowly back and forth.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then lift your hand gently and observe the spot; if you see that some of the bone is already exposed, like a grain of barley, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand with the iron, using another one if it has cooled down, until you see what I have told you to look for.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a little salt and dissolve it on the spot, leaving it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place around the edges of the wound and leave it on until the burn scar has healed completely.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the spot with a fourfold remedy so that it may be healed."
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	"And they said that whenever the plague breaks out, it is better to tie one's arms tightly, for it brings greater relief and healing."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	"And some of them said that the spine should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cautery should be held there until some part of the spinal marrow is adhered."
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	"Then scrape off what has adhered to the bone, and then treat it."
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end, it should press strongly onto the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the form of a small alfecati."
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	"And they believe that from that spot the vapors of the head expire."
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	"And let the plague remain untreated for a long time, and then treat it so that it may be consolidated."
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	"But I have not seen these two kinds of cauteries performed entirely, but only in some men due to fear; and that one, it seems to me, is better with health when present, for the head is dilated by solution of continuity from this same cause as we have testified regarding other members, and even more so when the head of the sick person is of a hot nature."
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better, in my opinion; and with that instrument and that procedure one has health."
Capitol segon.	"Chapter Two."
Del cauteri del cap.	"On cauterizing the head."
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	"When there is chronic and long-lasting pain in the whole head and this persists for a prolonged period of illness, and various remedies are used such as bandages, poultices, compresses, plaster casts, ointments, decoctions, poultices made from plants or animal parts, and similar things, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not help much due to those causes, then consider whether the head of the sick person is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not hotter than usual, then cauterize it with another cautery at another place near that one."
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	"And similarly cauterize it on the horn of his head with a cautery until the bone is broken."
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	"Cut the bone and expose it to the quantity we have mentioned, and cauterize there with a cautery at the last part of the head where it is called 'vagus', which is the place where cupping is performed."
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	"And be gentle in this matter and do not expose the bone, for the illness suffers great pain from this different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head."
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And I say this cautery in its place, for it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery that one uses to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput, which is a more subtle cautery than that used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is its form."
Capitol ters.	"Chapter Three."
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	"On cauterizing chronic migraine."
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	"When there is sudden pain in the part of the head or a stabbing pain within it, evacuate with medications that cleanse the head and administer the other treatment which I have mentioned in the remedies for illnesses; and if nothing helps, then cauterize in two ways: either with a caustic medication that burns, or with iron."
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	"The better cautery with burning medication is this: take some aloe and scrape it and cut off both its heads."
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	"And then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until you reach the bone beneath it."
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	"And then press it with a tight bandage for several hours, and leave it alone for three hours; then remove the bandage and remove the aloe, leaving the wound open for two or three days; then bathe the surrounding area with warm water until the location becomes moist."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	"If you wish, do this with some caustic medications which I have written about in the second book of caustic medicines."
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"The better cautery with iron is done in this way: heat the cautery which has this shape:"
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	"and it is called 'closed nails', for its head is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence."
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	"And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand steady so that the heat does not adhere to the cautery which is underneath; and slowly rotate the hot iron with speed."
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	"And if the quantity of it that adheres to the bone is thus much, lift your hand up so that the artery below does not adhere, lest blood flow."
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then immerse the area in salt water and place it there, leaving it alone for three days; then bathe the area with warm water, and treat it with ointment until it is healed."
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	"And if you wish, cauterize with the point of a knife according to cautery, and beware of incising an artery in this chronic migraine properly."
Capitol quart.	"Chapter Four."
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	"On cauterizing acute migraine."
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	"When you treat migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if the treatment does not help, and the illness is such that it does not reach what we have said about the first cautery with medication or with fire, then heat the knife cautery until it is red hot, and place your hand on the location of the pain with a line of its length, and press it there until you incise the artery and enter to the bone."
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	"However, it is necessary for you to beware of the continuation of the mandible, which is moved by chewing, and that the muscle is not adhered to and the nerves that move it, and that spasms do not occur."
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	"And if it is about the caution and care of blood flow from the artery that is opened, for there is fear in its opening, especially for him who does not know what he is doing and is not studious and experienced; leave the operation at the beginning."
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	"And I will bring to mind the regimen of accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner, in its place in this book."
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	"And if you see that this illness does not benefit from this cautery and that the patient can tolerate it, cauterize him in the middle of his head as we have told, and treat the wound until it is healed."
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	"And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on tying an artery with cautery having two points, for this is better cautery and more effective."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter Five."
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	"On cauterizing earaches."
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	"When there is pain in the ear due to friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments that have been mentioned in the division, but the pain is not removed, then heat the cautery, which is called 'punctum' and has this shape:"
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	"And then prick it at the ignition point and lead it around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or around each prominence if the pain is in each one."
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	"Be careful with the cautery of the ear's opening little by little because you have felt the location with its tip."
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	"And if you make ten points in all the ear and quit it, then treat those locations until they are healed."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter Six."
De cauterizacio de turtura.	"On cauterizing tortures."
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	"The torture that is treated with cautery is only of those species that come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases."
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	"Evade cauterization of the species that occurs through dryness or spasm of the nerve."
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	"When you treat that species of tortura with herbs and capipurgi and gargarisms, and yet you cannot confirm your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little behind the cheekbone, and the third at the junction of two lips."
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	"And place your cautery on the opposite side from where the ailment began, for softening is seen only in the part that seems healed."
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	"And the manner of cauterization is that you should cauterize it with the cautery on the right side of the extreme tip of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and another on the cheekbone, its length being equal to the length of the thumb, and then place your hand with the cautery until most of the surface area of the wound is burned."
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	"And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is a specialty of the barber-surgeon, the shape of which is shown on this table."
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	"Although perhaps it may seem too subtle to you, yet in place of unnecessary roughness it is better to cut a little."
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure the wound with what is denoted as processed before until it is healed."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII."
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	"On the cautery of ancient apoplexy."
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	"When apoplexy is ancient and you cure it with what we have said and your medication does not work and the ailment has no fever, then cauterize those places with four cauteries: on all the horns of its head; and a cautery in the middle of the head, as we have said; and a cautery behind the ear."
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	"And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said above."
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	"After it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and if it is worse, then it should be cured with what you process."
Capitol .viii.	"Chapter VIII."
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Burns caused by forgetfulness are treated with flame cautery.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	"Great quantities of pills are given to the patient at the beginning, serving to cleanse."
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	"And then immediately cover the entire head of the patient and place on it the plaster described in the treatise on plasters."
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	"And apply this several times, for this is a manner of cautery."
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	"And do this according to that method already mentioned."
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	"If this does not heal well, then make three cauteries in the last section of their head, which should be descending from the most elevated part of the head towards the lowest part of the neck."
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	"And place between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and immediately cover the cautery with that which has been produced."
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	"But if the patient can tolerate it, then make a cautery in the middle; and if they want more, then cauterize those over both ears."
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	"Then cover that which has been healed; and let the cauteries be oval according to the form given above."
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of paralysis and softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	"First, you shall proceed with the preparation of the head using herbs and the things we have mentioned. Then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize him in the middle of the head with a cautery. Also cauterize all around the horns of his head, and cauterize at the last part of it. And apply three cauteries on the spinal bones of the neck."
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	"If the illness of softening of the body is great and the patient cannot tolerate it, then cauterize him with four cauteries on the spinal bones of the back, and afterward cauterize within the hollow of his throat, and lift up his hands."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	"And also cure that which is healed, and this shall be cauterized with an olive-oil cautery."
Capitol .x.	"Chapter X."
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	"On the cautery treatment of epilepsy."
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	It is not cauterized in the epileptic unless that epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, it is necessary to cleanse the brain at the beginning of the disease and also in the other cure which we have spoken about in the division when the patient has a great deal of phlegm and is tolerant of medicine.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargarisms and masticatories to cleanse the throat, previously for several days, with good nutrition.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And afterwards shave the head of the patient, and also cauterize him with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the nape of his neck, and on each horn of the head cauterize also.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then cauterize him with cauteries as mentioned before, having paralysis and relaxation of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And use an olive-shaped cautery according to what has been described previously.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterizing him with subtle cauteries in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cautery for melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize the patient with the cauteries that we have mentioned before, having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous matter declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink water that cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned before in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And also shave the head of the patient, and also make a suitable pigeon's egg of it on the circumference, and also leave that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient lie down on his back, and let him be held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and afterwards it is worthy of anointing with wool grease.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat this over the fire for moderate warming by measure, which the patient can suffer when it is applied to him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put this in the middle of the head of the patient within the circle, and let it remain until it becomes cool.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once each week until it is healed; or if you wish, cauterize him with small punctures according to what suits him best, without having your hand close to a cautery arranged in this way: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain evenly.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that ointment smeared on wool or on grease of lard.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	"For cauterization of descending water in the heel."
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	"When you notice the start of water descent in the heel through the signs that I mentioned earlier in this section, then begin and give the patient something to drink which cleanses the head, and protect them from all humidity."
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	"And do that treatment in a bath for several days."
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	"And also order him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries over both temples if there is the beginning of descent of water in both heels, or on one side if it begins on one heel."
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	"Incise with a cautery all the veins and arteries which are below the elbow, and let the cauteries be placed at that distance level with the temples."
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	"And take care not to have flows of blood when cauterizing. And if you see any flow of blood from it, stop it with some medication, which is within your ability."
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	"And you should come with skill in extracting arteries and in excising them, and caution against flows of blood."
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	"Sometimes it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries placed perpendicularly."
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of cautery for dried tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	"When tears from the eyes are abundant and flow through veins and arteries in the visible area of the head, it is verified that this is excess fluid from bloody humors. Therefore, cauterize around the beginning of water entering the eyes with the cautery mentioned at the start of this chapter, and cauterize the middle of the head, two points on either side of the temples, and two points on either side of the jawbones."
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	"If additional cautery is needed, then cauterize the entire length of the eyebrow ridge above the eye with a small cautery."
Capitol .xiiii.	"Chapter XIV."
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	"Of cautery for foul odor from the nose."
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	"When you treat someone with the method described earlier and it does not improve, then prepare and give them to drink the decoction for three nights. After that, shave their head and cauterize the crown of the head with a mixture of cautery iron and olive oil."
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	"And also cauterize the middle of the forehead with clove cautery and two cauteries on either side of the eyebrows where the hair begins, each one a little smaller."
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	"And be careful not to burn the face with the cautery."
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	"Here is how to make clove cautery:"
Capitol .xv.	Capital Fifteen
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	About eyelid cauterization in cases of inflammation.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"When the eyelid is inflamed due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a lunar cautery."
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	"And if you, cauterize the two eyebrows each with two cauteries in total, and elongated from the temples."
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	"And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow."
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	"And do not press too hard on the cautery with your hand, but according to how much the third part of the eyelid is adhered."
Capitol .xvi.	Capítulo XVI
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	"Regarding cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and pierce it."
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	"When the hairs of the eye turn inward so as to pierce it, there are two ways to cauterize them: either with fire or with a burning medicine."
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	"If you cauterize with fire, first tell the patient to pluck out his hairs as they are plucked for shaving, until they are lengthened and thickened; and if one of them touches their opening, then immediately close the eyes with a bandage so that it is not harmed until the hairs have grown."
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	"Then, when they have grown long and thickened, then pause the head of the patient on your thigh, and carefully place the cautery on the eyelid of the eye with the tip, shaped like a grass blade, at the beginning where the hairs are."
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	"And then place hot wax or dough made from ground barley or pitch on the eye."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	"And then light the cautery of which this is the shape:"
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	"And then cauterize along the shape that you have drawn, little by little, in several views, until the surface of the line that is like a myrtle leaf is completely burned."
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	"The sign of the completion of this procedure is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and its hairs raised away from the puncture of the eye."
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	"And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place cotton with a border over it until the scar has healed."
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	"If some cause returns through the skin near their birthmark and the eyelid is swollen, then apply the cautery again in that same spot just as you did initially."
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	"If the hairs on the eyelid are growing outwards, then cauterize that area which is elevated to its natural place and sealed so that the hairs cannot stick out."
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"If the cautery with medicine burns you, then order the patient to apply the hairs which are lengthened and sealed, and nearby make a bandage of cloth in the shape of a miter leaf."
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	"And take some known soap and live coal together with a needle, and immediately mix those coals well, and do this with haste so that it does not cool down; then spread that onto the cloth which is made in the shape of a miter leaf, and place it over one eye or both; and place a cloth dipped in egg white over the other eye, keeping the head of the patient upright."
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	"And place your finger over the medicine and press it gently without moving until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for that bite is like fire."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	"And when you perceive that the bite has ceased, then remove the medicine with your finger; and when the bite stops, then rinse the eye with water. Then observe if the eyelid is lifted up as it should be after being washed away by the contraction with fire or incision, for then it will be good. And if not, then place the medicine again on the location where it did not stick previously until it becomes sealed and your operation is completed."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	"And then place over that with a border until the chain of adhesion has been eradicated; and then heal it with a poultice or another remedy until it is healed."
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	"And it is necessary that you, after your operation, carefully guard that nothing falls into the eye from the medicine. And if the eyelid becomes inflamed after several days and some cause of hairs punches into the eye, then repeat your medicine over that location where the eyelid is inflamed; and particularly do this as you did at the beginning until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"And this is the shape of a miter leaf."
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"And know that the eyes of men are differentiated according to their size and smallness, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"And do not reveal the way of rectitude to one who studies this art."
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lachrymal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	"When you treat fistula as we've said in the divisions of illnesses and your treatment does not conform, then you must cauterize it in this manner: Command the patient to place their head on their knees, and have a servant hold their head between their thighs so that it is not moved nor agitated with their head."
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	"And then apply heat in the form of hot water or poultice of bird droppings onto the wound."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Now take the cautery of which this is the shape:"
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	"That is heated, like the shape of a reed or an eagle's feather, at one end with which you make the cautery."
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	"And if you wish, it should penetrate somewhat into the other extremity."
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	"And if you want, it should be sharp like a needle."
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	"But however that which is heated is better for your task."
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	"And then press the fistula with it if it is open, and draw out from it the sanies (pus) and dry it up."
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	"If it is not open, then apply that cautery there to make it so, and extract the pus from it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	"And then apply the cautery which has been well heated onto it, and with that hand hold it against the wound near the opening of the nostril to prevent your hand or the patient from being burned, and then apply the cautery onto the surface of the wound and destroy it."
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	"And then if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good. Otherwise, apply the cautery again once or twice as necessary, and leave it there for three days, and then apply a bandage around it with a drying ointment until it is healed."
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	"But if after twelve days it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine to it until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what you will find in its chapter."
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	"And another manner of cauterizing a fistula that some first said: Enter into the location of the fistula and make it hot, and then apply there gently with this form: Take as much melted lead as the length of your little finger. And with your hand hold it with good retention so that the molten lead does not fall onto the wound; and cover the wound of the patient with a cloth dipped in album of eggs or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing."
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	"And if the fistula has been healed by that which we have said about cauterization and cure, then that is good. Otherwise, it will be necessary to administer a probe through the nostril and reduce the fistula into the nasal cavity according to what will come in its proper place."
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On cauterizing the split in the buttocks.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	"Fissures occur frequently in the lips, especially in those of infants."
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	"So when you treat these fissures with what we have said in the divisions and it does not help, then immediately use a small cauterizing scalpel according to this form that is indicated:"
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	"And let its concavity be like the thinness of a knife blade."
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	"Approach carefully and place that cautery in those fissures until it reaches the bottom of them."
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	"And then cure it with wax until it is healed."
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of the cautery of a fistula in the mouth
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or on the roots of the teeth an aposteme appears and it grows, and then bursts, and becomes ancient, and blood flows and a fistula is formed, and you treat that and it does not benefit from treatment, then it is necessary for you to heat cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and put that heated one into the passage of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end of it do this once or twice; and then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And if the bone is separated and it heals, good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover that place and remove the decayed bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of the cautery of teeth and softening of the gums
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines but they do not improve, then place the head of the sick one on the chair, and heat the cautery in this form which will come later, so that you put the pincers over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it, keeping your hand there a little while until the sick one feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand and repeat the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the sick one should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it there for an hour, and afterwards spit that out, because the painful tooth is made firm and the softened gum is strengthened and the corrupt moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	De fistulis que son en las dentz e de curacio d'ells.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	"For cauterization of tooth pain."
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	"When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or it's broken or worm-eaten, and medical treatment does not relieve the condition, then cauterization is applied in two ways: either with a hot iron brand from cattle, or by applying fire."
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	"Cauterization with a hot iron brand is done by taking the branding iron of cattle and heating it on coals, then quickly taking it out and wrapping it in cotton. Then you apply that heated brand to the painful tooth area without delay until it becomes numb."
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	"And repeat this several times until the heat reaches the root of the teeth."
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	"And if you wish, dip wool or cotton in the above-mentioned branding iron and place it on the painful tooth. Then place the heated iron on top of that until the iron reaches the entrance to the cavity of the tooth."
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	"But remember that cauterization with fire is dangerous and should be done with caution, ensuring the heat of the iron or coal does not reach the mouth of the patient."
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	"And then heat the cauterizing tool according to its shape, and place it on the tooth without touching your hand until it becomes numb. Do this several times a day until the pain is completely gone or has significantly decreased either that same day or the next."
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	"And it is necessary that after using this cauterization, the patient holds their mouth open with a good grip and keeps it like that for one hour, then spits. This is the form of cauterization."
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	"And cauterize whichever extremity you wish according to your ability."
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	"And this is the shape of the cannula:"
Capitol .xxii.	"Chapter XXII."
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	"Of cautery for external prolapse."
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	"When prolapse is caused by mucus and humors that are refractory to digestion despite medications, then you may attempt digestion of those substances lightly; however, if necessary, cauterize the prolapse using a cautery instrument shaped as follows: having two extremities bored through which smoke can exit during cauterization, pause the ignited end over the prolapse once or twice until it reaches its center."
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	"And if the prolapse is small, then pause the cautery according to its size, and leave it for three days, applying heat on its edges until what was burned by fire has healed."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	"Then apply that ointment and bandages so that it may heal."
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	"And the shape of the cautery instrument for such prolapse is as shown [in the illustration]:"
Capitol .xxiii.	"Chapter XXIII."
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	"On cauterization of the uvula and on the stricture of the anus."
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When excessive humidity comes upon the surface of the lung, especially if it's accompanied by coldness in the chest, then the patient should initially be treated with laxative medications and cautery applied on that part pressed by the collarbone.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And make sure to apply the cautery carefully so as not to burn the collarbone itself or its nerves.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize another spot with another cautery at the junction of the collarbone and the last cervical vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cautery on it should be applied in the same manner as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that with what has been prescribed until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Regarding the cautery treatment of lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When all coughs and illness of the lung are from moist humors, and the patient has no fever nor phlegm, and it is an ancient illness, then cauterize them with two cauteries on the collarbone in the places depressed by lions and buoys; and with another cautery in the middle place of the chest between two nipples; and let the cauteries be shaped according to the preceding form.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, the cautery for puncturing should be done with the cautery called "puncta", the form of which is shown in the puncturing of earache.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And if there are points within them, apply to those; and especially cure that with water, as it is said before, so that it may be healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And if the cauteries are to have three branches, for cautery there are three cauteries which you can make according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter 25."
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	"The cautery of hemorrhoids that are at the end of the anus."
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	"When the head of the hemorrhoid is displaced due to slippery moistness and is not held in place during its return, you must reduce this displacement before it returns to its usual position, using a slight movement. This should be done so that it enters properly, as we have testified. At first, you should reduce the displacement while the patient is lying on their back or side. Then elevate the anal canal, which is inside the anus, with your left hand."
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And thus there are two heads to the cautery; this is its form:"
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	"And thus cauterize the anal canal so that it enters one inside the other. And now comes the figure of cauterization with four heads."
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"and this subtle according to the quantity of tentacle; and this is its form:"
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	"And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and therefore there are eight heads."
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	"And then pause on the cautery for five days with salt water, and then make sure that the patient rests quietly, and the member is not moved for any time until it is comforted."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	"And if the displacement is towards the upper parts and it is done thus, then cauterize on the muscle with a clawed cautery or pointed cauteries, for the junction is strengthened and the moisture is removed and the ailment is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	"Chapter XXVI."
De cauterizacio del stomac.	"On cauterization of the stomach."
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	"When there comes into the stomach much moisture and heat which causes it to become swollen and multiplicative in its nature, and if you continue with the usual methods of treatment and do not relieve it, then it is necessary for the ailment to be on its two sides, and extend its hands and feet, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one on the left side near the pit of the stomach with a clawed cautery about the size of a finger, and two on either side of the ribs of the chest, so that the figure of the cautery is triangular; and extend those that are not suitable in order to avoid injury."
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	"And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of two thirds of the canal."
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	"And let the figure of the cautery be according to this form without addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is one cautery according to the form of a circle thus:"
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	"And the stomach should be punctured according to that which is feared from this cautery: and thus you will feel on the stomach puncturing with a tentacle as much as you wish, and then cauterize it in those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that is previously mentioned until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvii.	"Chapter XXVII."
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	"On cauterization of the fatty liver."
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or moisture or excess windiness so that its normal condition is departed from by superfluous exit, and if the ailment is cured with what we have said and yet does not improve, then it is necessary for the ailment to be raised up on its back, and feel with a tentacle three cauteries according to this form and quantity measure over the liver on the left side of the hypochondrium where the decubitus of man lies."
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	"And let the space that is between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right arm."
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	"And do not compress your hand with the cautery too much."
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	"And if the quantity of what is cauterized is equal to the thickness of the middle finger, and it should not be pressed too much; and if the ailment stands on its feet, and if it does not stand up, then let it be made to lie down, which has already extended its feet, and raise its arms."
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	"And this is the form of the cautery:"
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-cautery if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	"And be careful that you do not proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the middle finger be cauterized entirely so that all the body may be cauterized and enter into the veins, because here the middle finger is subtle. Know this."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	"On perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	"When there is an eruption or abscess in the liver and you wish to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the ailment will be grave and painful without sharpness."
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	"And if it is in the tunic of the liver, then the pain will be sharp and great, and often the physicians are weary of treating it."
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	"Therefore let the ailment be turned towards its back, and then feel with a tentacle the location of the abscess; and then kindle the cautery which is similar to a rake, the form of which has been described on another page."
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	"And cauterize with that cautery until all the flesh is burned away, until it reaches the diaphragm, until in ashes it heals."
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed."
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	"But this form of cautery should not be used except by one whose studies in the art of medicine have been prolonged, and who has experienced many ailments; but even that one, sometimes, may be burned with this operation. But leave it to those who are better than us, for it is better."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	"On cauterizing pleasure."
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	"The ancients cauterized pleasure in this manner: first take from the vessels of the seminal ducts a dry vessel with a long opening that is found there, and its thickness should be like that of a finger."
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	"And then submerge this in oil and place it in the fire, and cauterize with a cautery at the location that is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries leave them guided thus, one slightly inclining towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries on what declines between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining slightly towards the back sides; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with one cautery at that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest."
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	"And you do not need to buy a cautery, but it should be in your chain in deeds."
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	"And those ancient people said that among men were some who used cauteries of iron similar to a ray and fiery like this one, and they placed it at that location between the ribs, until they reached that boil with it and it was opened cleanly, as we have said about the boil on the liver."
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	"But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for many die instantly if it happens in the location of the fistula which does not heal."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	"Of the cauterization of the spleen."
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	"When you treat the illness of the spleen with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not agree with your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to its figure, similar to those of the liver whose figure has preceded."
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	"And between each cautery let it be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery should be as we have said in the cautery of the liver equally."
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	"And do not buy your own cautery, and let the disease be even on its two sides."
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	"And another manner of cauterizing is this: ignite the cautery having two vents, whose cause we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift up the chain which is towards the spleen where the seat of the disease lies."
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	"And let your lifting be such that you lift up the chain along the length of the body so that cauteries are made according to its width."
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	"And then introduce the two vents, kindle it immediately, into that place where with those you penetrate the chain from the other side."
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	"And then extract the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made."
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vents."
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	"And then cure the cautery, since it has left to give birth after too many days, for it is more beneficial than the other causes mentioned in the cure."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter XXXI."
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	"On cauterizing a dropsical patient."
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	"No cautery should be applied to dropsical patients except in certain cases."
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	"When you treat the dropsical patient according to the methods of treatment mentioned in this section and yet your treatment does not succeed, it is then necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach."
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	"And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin."
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	"And remove the cautery promptly so that it does not burn for too long."
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	"Don't evacuate the disease by cautery alone, but use whatever else is appropriate to add to it, and hasten recovery with helpful remedies."
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	"The form of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be like a sword according to its previous shape. And that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as it is previously described in its form."
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of feet and legs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen in dropsy and filled with yellowish water, it is necessary to cauterize them on the instep of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe, raising your hand with the cautery and not twisting it; and then raise your hand and do not return that completely, for the yellow water will subside.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery is made in this way: First place two cauteries on the two thighs and make a cautery on each thigh with the point of the cautery spoon.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The cautery should be made along the length of the thigh, one below the kneecap and the other below the middle of the thigh. Two cauteries on each thigh are to be applied.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Leave the wound uncovered after its cure for a long time, so that no water may accumulate there.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then treat those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On cauterizing the body of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	"When the body becomes cold and moist internally, causing weakness in the organs, this is the digestive and retentive virtue residing in the stomach and intestines. This is cured by medical practices without cauterization unless the patient exhibits extreme symptoms, in which case a large cautery should be applied to their stomach as previously mentioned."
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	"If there are excessive humidities and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize above the penis and intestines. Also apply two cauteries firmly to the stomach near the groin as this is a perfect cure for the ailment, in which you should not err."
Capitol .xxxiv.	"Chapter XXXIV"
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Burning of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When there are recent hemorrhoids or one of the thick humors that rubs or corrupt humidities is present, and they do not heal with what was said in the division nor follow their usual treatment, then cauterize them with three cauteries on both sides of the anus near the bottom of the two small triangular folds, and with a cautery above the navel towards the two sides.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you find that the stomach is cold and the food is not digested, and the face often appears pale, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery as described above; and with one cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen with a pointed cautery, leaving the cautery in place for some time until the wound heals internally.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Regarding cauterization after the excision of hemorrhoids.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you sever a vein, then ignite the cautery that resembles an arrow.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Apply the heated cautery between the severed vein and seal its opening until blood flow stops.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, because if there are too many veins, then cauterize each one separately according to what has been reported, and afterwards dress the wounds until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	But be careful not to burn too much skin with a large cautery, as it will cause greater harm than good.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter XXXVI
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Regarding the cauterization of fistulas naturally occurring in the skin.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	If nature does not follow the treatment recommended here and the patient becomes frightened as a result, then apply a cautery to heal it.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there is some fistula appearing naturally on the skin that has become old and corrupted by dryness and moisture, then it is more appropriate to probe it with a thin, subtle thread and thus determine its depth using the aforementioned thread.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then heat the cautery which resembles a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then insert that heated cautery into this fistula, following the depth indicated by the thread.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And continue applying the cautery until those corrupt tissues are completely burned away in one or two or three applications, depending on the severity of the condition.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	But be careful not to burn any nerves or veins. And if the fistula goes into the bladder or the intestines, then be very careful in those areas. Do not do this unless the fistula is in fatty tissue and you believe it is not penetrating deeply.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the opening becomes sealed and the infected material is removed from it, and it remains like this for a long time, then you will know that it has healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the infected material is not coming out of it, then you should know that it is penetrating or that there is some underlying bone corruption. This may be due to one of those causes which will be remembered later in this chapter.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter XXXVII
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of the cauterization of warts.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	"When pain is caused by rubbing or thick windiness in the lungs, and the patient's heart is thereby weakened, it is necessary to cauterize that area over the ribs with a pointed cautery on each rib."
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	"And then cauterize again, leaving a little space between them so that three cauteries can fit lined up, and finally place two more diagonally for reinforcement."
Capitol .xxxviii.	"Chapter XXXVI."
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Burning of the bladder
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is debilitation and softening in the bladder due to friction and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it at the opening of the urethra, where the hairs of the pubic region begin. Cauterize with a hot iron on the right side and another on the left side.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of hair at the opening of the vulva. And cauterize there with a hot iron on the lower part of the vulva or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And use a cautery that is pointed, depending on what is being treated
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXIX
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of cauterizing the uvula
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the uvula becomes dry and humid, and because of this conception is prohibited, and her menstruation is corrupted, and their onset is delayed, and there is pain during their emission, then that place should be cauterized with three cauteries in the region of the navel, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower part of the vulva or with two cauteries, using a pointed cautery.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	"Regarding cauterization of dislocation of the ankle."
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	"When moist mucous exudes at the site of the ankle, and there are several causes of the swelling of its cavity, a sign of this is that one thing is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them."
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	"And the site of dislocation is found in the lower abdomen."
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	"Then you should cauterize the injury around the ankle with a circular cautery similar to this, for you will have marked around the circumference of the site as it is revolved, and thus the site will fall in the middle of the circle."
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	"And let the cautery be of such form as is used in the cauterization of the stomach."
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	"But if this cautery is not at hand, then cauterize with three cauteries having an olive-shaped point."
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And let the cautery be according to the amount of thickness of the whole cord; and afterwards care for it until it is healed."
Capitol .xli.	"Chapter XL1."
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	"Of Cauterization of the Sciatic Vein."
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	"When pain occurs in the site of the ankle due to friction and humidity, the injury is cured with that which we have said and not otherwise. But if it is ancient, then you should open the injury to remove thick humors with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and afterwards cauterize it."
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	"And the manner of cautery in that is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire."
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	"Knowing two methods, of which one is that you cauterize around the site of the ankle with three triangular cauteries according to this shape; and make them with good depth."
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of the finger, and if the cauteries are olive-shaped or large."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	"But sometimes it may be that the cauteries are placed over the middle of the top of the ankle, for there are four cauteries."
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle which is prescribed in the form of cautery for dislocation of the ankle, so that it may be a continuous circle and burn through the thickness of the whole cord."
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	"And this is the manner of cautery in sciatica when pain is adhered to the ankle and not extended within the thigh."
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	"But if it is extended within the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries over the thigh at the location where you feel the pain that is the cause of it; and with one cautery over the shinbone about four fingers' breadth below the right side."
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	"And if the cautery is cuticular, let the depth of the cautery be according to the thickness of the cord."
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	"And if you find that the pain extends within the location near those said buttocks, then cauterize there where you feel it with cauteries of three points or four or more if necessary."
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	"And if you find that the pain is near the place where the thigh meets the buttock, then cauterize there with one cuticular cautery."
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	"And beware in all cautery that you do not finish the cautery to such an extent that you burn nerves or large arteries; and that because of this you do more harm than good or cause contraction."
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"And I have seen some of those who cauterized over the shinbone and finished the cautery there, causing the leg to swell within so that the swelling reached the foot, and it was pierced and corrupted all the flesh."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	"And moreover, accidental purging of the bowels often occurs, and because of this death."
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	"If pain is in two locations at once, then cauterize each according to this manner."
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	"And some wise men have said that in cautery of the ankle, this is the manner: make it similar to a circle of iron whose circumference is about a span; and let its depth be according to the thickness of a date bone or less than that."
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And within that circle let there be another third one; and let the space between them be equal to the width of a nut from the palm; and let those circles be open on two sides; and let their length be one or two nuts, and make their edge of iron neatly rounded in the circles; this is the form:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Approach fire to heat it until it reddens and sparks fly off, then place it on the part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their left side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that leg three times in one session.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then leave it to rest for three days; plaster that wound with the edge and let the bandage remain on too long; and cure that wound until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Oh, son, this kind of cauterization we have rarely used due to the fear of the wound's appearance, and because few patients we have found who tolerate it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But among those who endured them, some had that mark on their leg.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cauterization with medicated irons is done by making two circles, one inside the other pierced with holes in which the hot iron door handle is placed; let the thickness of their walls be equal to the size of two nuts or those of similar size.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the space between them is equal to the quantity of the thickness of the finger, and they are opened below and above, and their length is such that they can contain themselves according to this shape:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then pause on the edge of the ulcer and place your hand over its opening; then take boiled water and pour it between the two circles, ensuring that the water has been heated gently over the fire for about an hour. Let the patient endure the burning sensation and discomfort until the burning stops.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then raise your hand with the instrument and rinse off the boiled water from all around the ulcer with fresh water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	Then leave it for three days and pause over it until the blackness of the burned area has disappeared. Then leave it for a few more days, and finally apply honey to promote healing. This is the last step in treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then dress the wound with bandages until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain has spread to the foot or leg, do as follows: place a vessel containing water at the height of the ulcer, as was done with the water equalization.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method for boiled water, which I have already written about in my treatise on the correction of medical terms.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take equal parts of soda and unslaked lime, grind them together finely, and place in a new earthenware pot with a small hole pierced at the bottom, according to the size that fits inside the ulcer.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	Then place another earthenware pot upside down on top of it, and pour boiled water over the soda and unslaked lime mixture until it reaches about one finger's breadth. Then press it gently with your hand for good compression, and allow the boiled water to drain from the pierced hole into the inverted pot underneath.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	"Then carefully adjust all that water, and throw it onto another living creature or other renewed alkali, because at that moment it will be very caustic, which is administered in many medical operations and in cauterization of other members."
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	"And thus with some medicines with which wide areas are cauterized, such as tees (iron), melagrace and cause mixed with soap in this way that they are blended."
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	"And Gaul recounts an operation and cure with which sciatic vein pain is cured, and greatly praises it, saying that no other treatment is needed, because it is healed by one application as he recounts, for indeed the ointment in bath and plaster already knows about that."
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	"And it is that if possible take fresh centaury, and if not found, fig leaves may be taken; and much should be chopped with a little garlic and placed on the water where there is pain, or on the thing, or on the bed, and wrapped around."
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	"And it should be left for about three hours or until the patient feels relief from the adhesion."
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	"And then put him in a bath and when his body is warm, rub that plaster on it, because the pain stops and he is healed."
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	"And know that it is not necessary to use cautery with these medicines but only the evacuation of the body."
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	"As Hippocrates says, when the vein is narrowed by a goat's split, cauterize it and profit will come to its owner. The cautery should be prepared in this manner: wool should be taken and dipped in old oil, then placed between the toes of the foot and between the bones."
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	"And next, take a dry goat's hair and inflame it with fire until it becomes carbonized. Then place it on the wool and leave it there until it cools down."
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	"And continue to do this, not ceasing until the sensation of pain reaches the ankle and then rest the limb."
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	"And this method of cautery is called the 'cautery of vultures'."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLII."
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	"Of cauterization for pain in two places."
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	"Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes, such as by contusion or blow or excessive evacuation, and for causes similar to these, by infusion of hot and humid matter."
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	"And cautery is not used except in this single case which occurs due to the effusion of hot matter."
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	"Therefore, first perform evacuation of the disease with pills made from drugs similar to those used for cautery, and place them on the back where the pain is located. The distance between each pill should be three lines according to its latitude, and for every ten pills or more, cauterize one line according to the amount of endurance of the disease and its strength."
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	"And perform cautery with cauteries having a pointed tip."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using the middle cautery of the keyhole shape:"
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"Of cautery for the beginning of trembling (convulsions)."
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	"Very often this disease occurs in young children; the sign of its onset in children is that accidents occur on their spine with elevation and movement."
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	"And you will find inflammation in the last thoracic vertebra of the back and of the nerves that are already beginning to rise above the others."
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	"Therefore, when you see this and wish to prohibit it (i.e., prevent convulsions), immediately cauterize that area with a cautery that is circular in shape:"
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	"which should cover the entire width of the vertebra."
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines away."
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	"And let the points be close together between them."
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	"Then treat the wound that is healed with what we have said (i.e., dress it appropriately)."
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	"But be careful not to administer cautery in trembling caused by spasm of nerves."
Capitol .xliv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	"Of cautery for gout and pain in the joints."
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	"When pain in the joints is caused by hot humors which are congealed in each member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call this gout properly."
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	"And therefore, when gout caused by heat has been cured with treatment and the pains are not removed, then cauterize them."
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	"And if you cauterize that area for evacuation purposes, do so around the joint of the foot with many cauteries."
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And let the cautery be olive-shaped, of which this is the shape:"
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	"If it is necessary that points should be made on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery."
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	"And if the pains penetrate into the joints or other joints and this happens very often, then cauterize that area over each painful spot with three or four cauteries of the olive-shaped cautery throughout its entire width."
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	"And if many cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize and do not press the cautery too hard beforehand, but only around the circumference of the joint."
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	"And if the pains penetrate into the joint and the bone, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter."
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	"And if the pains are only in the muscles and it is called sciatica, then make punctures around the buttocks thus, making them two lines apart."
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	"And if the pains remain in these areas, then make punctures around the buttocks over each nerve and over the palm of the hand."
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	"And if the pains approach the hips to the loins or muscles, then cauterize each one throughout its entire length."
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	"And do not evacuate the illness through proper diet and receiving of medications, because if there is good regulation and inflammation is evacuated with this cautery without being healed, God help us."
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter XLV."
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	"Of cautery for fractures."
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	"When a fracture occurs in the bones of the thigh or shinbone before reaching the knee, and this is how it begins, then you should order the patient to leave off eating on that day and to use gentle ointments so that the wound may heal from his belly."
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	"And then keep the patient between your hands over his bone, and command him to hold his breath so that his belly may be full or appear the knee or shinbone."
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	"And then return that area with your hands and press it with tentatively the fracture over the bone of the thigh with the signal of the extremity which is similar to the half of a circle in its upper parts of the body."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then ignite the cautery, of which this is the shape:"
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	"until it becomes very hot and emits sparks."
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	"And then reduce the shinbone or knee into its concavity, and then place your hand over that area so that the bone does not move."
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	"And you have now inserted between the patient's legs and left one of your hands resting on his leg, with another assistant serving under his buttocks, another under his thigh, which should hold his thighs."
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	"And then place the cautery on that signal with your hand and apply it correctly, and maintain it until you achieve contact with the bone of the thigh in the middle of the joint; and repeat this again if you have not achieved it on the first attempt."
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	"And carefully observe the sensation of the bone during your cautery so that you do not burn the bone and cause great harm to the patient."
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	"And know that if with the cautery you do not touch the bone, your operation is of no use."
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	"And the cautery for children should be subtle according to their size and measure."
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	"And then treat that area with bandages for three days until the burn scar is healed."
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with other remedies until it is healed."
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	"And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the area and wound are completely healed."
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	"And it is necessary that you regulate the patient's diet according to the length of time for his cure which will empty his belly, and that the bone does not come out due to the effort of healing."
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	"And when he wants to get up after forty days, then administer a suitable plaster and keep him for another forty days."
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	"And let him be spared from work and from eating and drinking in abundance and from violent coughing, because when he uses this complete regimen of healing he will not be healed."
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	"And I will tell you the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and if they are large at the beginning, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity, as much as it is protruded from the anus like the third section of it; and then treat it with what has been said, and nothing else."
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	"And some earlier authors have said that rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery like this figure:"
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	"And the line is placed that they pass through the width in the side up from under the rupture, and another line above; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better."
Capitol .xlvi.	"The forty-sixth chapter"
De cauterizacio de torcio.	"Of cauterization of the groin."
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	"When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to chafing or percussion and persists for a long time without improving with treatment using medications, it is then necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	"And the cautery should be of such size according to the magnitude and smallness of the member, and its virtue and power, and the location of the hernia and the pain."
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	"So if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; but if not, then apply the cautery again; for those pains are usually caused by pressure on a member near the one in question, so it is necessary to reach those with cautery until the illness is healed."
Capitol .xlvii.	"The forty-seventh chapter"
De cauterizacio de lepra.	"Of cauterization of leprosy."
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	"Some lepers have been viewed as cauterized with little benefit and even harm if the type of leprosy is caused by decay of phlegm and melancholy."
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	"And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and whether it has been cured with what we have said in the division above. If not, then be afraid that the corruption will spread throughout his entire body and complexion. Therefore, cauterize him on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another towards the end of the forehead near the hair; two on both horns; and one behind, on the nape or top of the neck."
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	"Finally, press your hand with the cautery a little deeper until it impresses slightly on the bone, and remove the scabs that have formed there, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated from him; and cauterize on the chest as is necessary."
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	"And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize that person with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on both shoulder blades, and with six cauteries on the spine of the back, and with one large cautery on the spine near the buttocks, and one on the buttock itself, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the knees and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows and two on the muscles of the calves; and cauterize him on all the joints of the said limbs and feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the hollows of his hands."
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	"And beware not to burn those nerves which are situated on the heel lest you should injure them."
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	"Sometimes it is necessary to cauterize with one cautery on the bone of the sternum and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver."
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	"And know that the more closely you apply the cauteries, the greater is the benefit and efficacy; and know that the person does not feel pain from the cautery as he would from his own sores, because his body has become numb."
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	"And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the limbs and joints as is prescribed by the nature of the instruments."
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And afterwards, dress the wound with fine bran flour mixed with honey and with another dressing until it heals."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter XLVIII"
De cauterizacio de stupor.	"Of cautery for swelling."
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	"If any limb is paralyzed or numb and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize that paralyzed limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness."
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	"And insert your cautery into the spine through an incision."
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then care for him until he is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	Sometimes, certain wounds are cauterized which affect the hands and feet, the spine of the back and waist, and the nerves that move those limbs. The wound is then healed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Only let those presume to do this who are wise in anatomy of the members and in the exit of nerves that move all the body.
Capitol .xlix.	Capítulo XLIX
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterizing warts that have been removed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When the ulcer is ancient and does not respond to some medical remedies, then cauterize it with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the specificity of the cord, until its whiteness and color are removed, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And appropriate for this is to cure it with flour of barley and lentils mixed with olive oil and leaves of sage, and with dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one a portion and mixing all together, and then placing it on a cloth on the affected area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter One
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the cautery of a boil.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When a boil begins and you wish to open it, then cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery in the circuit of it thus as it turns.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen it happen sometimes.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more correct to cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said above, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter Two:
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	"Regarding the cautery of whitened skin."
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	"If some skin whitening is delayed in maturation, this may be due to superfluity produced by that (area), or because of the condition of the patient, who is elderly and decrepit with little blood, or because of time, and you wish to expedite the maturation of whitening; therefore cauterize around it with a small pointed cautery iron; and leave that (area) until it has matured."
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	"But if you wish to perforate with the cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and place it in the middle of the whitening where the chain penetrates."
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you cauterize that (area) which is lower down, so that the flesh of the arm may be alleviated, and then treat it until it has healed."
Capitol .lii.	"Chapter LII."
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	"On the cautery of ulcers."
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	"Ulcers are corrupting wanderings in the member, which consume that as dry wood consumes fire."
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	"Therefore if you cauterize that ulcer where it can withstand fire cautery, then heat cautery needles few and large according to what is suitable in that place where the ulcer is."
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	"And then cauterize it from beginning to end until you have completely eradicated all corruption and there remains no cause of it."
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	"And then leave it for three days, and bathe the cauterized areas solely with olive oil mixed (with honey) until all scars are eradicated and all corruption."
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	"And then treat it with fresh flesh-generating ointment."
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	"But if after three days you find that the flesh does not grow healthy where there is no corruption, then heat the cautery again on what remains in the corrupted places."
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	"And ulcers are sometimes treated with sharp medicine, because that is a halfway measure instead of cautery."
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	"But truly cautery with fire is the easiest remedy."
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	"And I have already spoken of the treatment of ulcers with sharp medicine in their division, and therefore take that when you begin to encounter them."
Capitol .liii.	"Chapter LIII."
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	"On the cautery of chilblains and similar conditions."
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	"Very often in the lower parts of the leg there appears a disease called chilblain, which is caused by cold and dampness, making the flesh numb. And it is treated in two ways: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water."
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	"But cautery with fire is done by heating the cautery concave similarly to a vulture's feather, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that the chilblain encompasses from beginning to end, and it should have thin edges."
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	"And then place that heated cautery upon the chilblain and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the chilblain until it reaches the depth of it."
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	"Then leave it for three days until it begins to swell."
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	"And then apply a plaster of wild mallows pounded with salt, and leave the plaster on it overnight, because that will eradicate its roots."
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the place with flesh-generating ointment until it is healed."
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	"And if it is not healed, and many times this occurs on the surface of the body, more often in the thighs and legs, then you should administer cautery with hot water there. And that is done by taking a cannula of brass or iron or vulture's feather and placing it upon the chilblain; and then pour some hot water into the cannula and hold your hand, and rotate that with compression from above so that the edge of the cannula presses upon the root of the chilblain and the hot water flows to the front of the root of the chilblain. And wait for the pain of the hot water for about an hour, and then remove it, because the chilblain along with its roots will be eradicated."
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	"And do this to those likewise until all of them upon which they have appeared on the body are removed."
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	"And then treat those with ointments that cause flesh to regenerate since the roots of the chilblains have been eradicated."
Capitol .liiii.	"Chapter LIV."
De cauterizacio de tremor.	"On cautery for trembling."
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	"When trembling occurs due to chill in the nerves or fever caused by coldness, or some other similar cause, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five upon the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also cauterize its foot and over its stomach with an olive-sized cautery."
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	"And trembling will cease and the health of the cold disease will be restored."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter LV."
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	"Regarding the cauterization of sudden accidents in the body."
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	"When the body is suddenly afflicted with sores and pustules from which matter issues that is thick and corrupt; therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to appear promptly and cauterize the head of the fistula with a thin cautery made of myrtle wood whose end has been heated in fire or with an elongated eraser or lenticular cautery."
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	"And in subsequent sores it is cauterized again at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is disrupted making them and they heal."
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	"But it is necessary that this be done with proper evacuation through phlebotomy."
Capitol lvi.	"Chapter 60."
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	"For cauterizing accidental bleeding from an artery by incision."
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	"And when a visible arterial hemorrhage occurs that is incised during surgery and flows abundantly, or if it's the incision of an aposteme or cautery of a limb, then seemly, and it's difficult to stop."
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	"Therefore when this happens to someone, then quickly bring your hand to the horrible wound of the artery, and press over it using the little finger first, so that you can see where the flow of blood comes from, and that it does not escape."
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	"And also press on the cauterizing olive oils, both small and large, by number, and exhale onto those until they are quite hot."
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	"And also take one of those oils, either small or large depending on the place and size of where the artery has burst, press it firmly onto that vein as soon as you have stopped the bleeding with your finger, so that the cauterizing may be complete and restrain the blood."
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	"And if the blood is still flowing from the wound of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then quickly take another one carefully from those that are prepared in the fire, and keep doing so until the bleeding has stopped."
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	"And be careful not to burn the nerves that are nearby, and that it does not come upon some other mischief or misfortune."
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	"And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by those means unless with one of four methods: either with cautery as mentioned above, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted (for when it is extracted, the ends of the membrane are burned and the blood is restrained), or by tying it with thread or linen with strong tension, or by placing medicines on it whose virtue is to restrain bleeding; and they should be pressed on with a poultice with appropriate compression."
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	"But he who applies proper restriction with linen and tension with cloth or by placing hot cauteries and similar things near it, does not perform but harms."
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	"But if it happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine, then press the tip of your index finger on the wound of that vein as we have said, and understand how to apply great pressure on the inside so that the blood may be stopped from flowing out of the main part of the wound, and do not remove your finger from above it; and sprinkle cold water that has been rubbed vigorously onto the cautery until the blood congeals and thickens; and see if there is a need for cautery or medicine."
Comensa la segonda partida.	"Begin the second section."
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	"Regarding incisions, punctures, wounds, and regarding phlebotomy and wounds and their like."
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	"This is from Albucasis."
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	"We have already said in the first chapter all the diseases in which cautery with fire is convenient and useful, and the occasions and causes of this, and the instruments necessary for them in their forms; and we have arranged the chapters from the head to the foot."
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	"And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that whoever wants it may find what he has sought."
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	"First, know this: in this chapter on incisions and punctures, you will find what is said in the first chapter on cautery."
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	"And because caution is necessary in the operations that are in this chapter, many times there will be evacuation which is done with blood, with which life is lost due to aspiration of the vein or incision on an aposteme or opening for extraction or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrowhead or cutting of a stone and their like."
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	"And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in many of them death occurs."
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	"And I warn you not to fall into that which is doubtful, for sometimes you will find men with many manners who have many diseases."
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	"And there are some who become angry with their illness and are hasty about it, even to the point of death, due to the severity of what they find in their illness, and the length of time they have had the illness, and because they fear that illness which signifies death."
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	"And there are those who give you their wealth and say to you, 'I hope for health from you,' but their illness is fatal."
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	"And therefore do not consent to that one who comes to you with this manner; let your caution be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume on any cause except approved certain knowledge which verifies it for you, and from which successful outcome may occur."
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	"And use in the treatment of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that to which health is converted, for in this you will find help in acquiring fame and renown, honor and glory."
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	"Oh, my sons, may God inspire His understanding to you and not remove from you direction and protection, for this is in His hand."
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	"And I have arranged this chapter distinguished by chapters according to what is said in the chapter on cautery of the head to the foot, so that you may find what you seek and need."
Capitol primier.	"First Chapter."
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	"Concerning the treatment of water that is held in the heads of infants."
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	"You should know that this disease often occurs in infants at birth, when the midwife stretches the child's head without its gentleness."
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	"And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known."
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	"But I have never seen this disease except in infants; and all those whom I saw were saved from death, for it is my belief that there was little hope in them."
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	"And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with water, and its head was always so swollen within that it could not cease even for a moment due to the greatness of its head, and more than the moisture increased within until death occurred."
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	"And this moisture is either gathered between the dura mater and the bone, or it is gathered outside the bone over the vertex."
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	"For if the operation is performed in that case where the moisture is between the dura mater and the bone and the aposteme is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head along its latitude, and let the length of the incision be two fingers so that the moisture may run out; this is the form of the spatula:"
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"And therefore if the moisture has increased more and the aposteme is greater, then there are two incisions here according to this manner:"
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	"And if the moisture is outside the bone, a sign of this is that you will find the commissures of the head opened up completely and the water squeezed out when you press them with your hand on the inside; this is not concealed from you."
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	"You should make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this manner:"
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	"And then extract all the moisture through the incision; and then stretch the incisions with bandages and cotton; and then on the fifth day annoint it from above with wine and oil, and then loosen the bandage and dress the wound with lint and egg whites, and then bind the head evenly; and let the patient eat dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed."
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	"And there is another manner of incision, which you should consider according to the magnitude of the aposteme and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in front, or on the right, or on the left; therefore make the incision where you see the aposteme and the fullness of water, and do thus as it seems best to you."
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	"And observe that thou dost not cut the artery, for it would cause a flow of blood which would harm the patient through that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
Capitol .ii.	"Chapter ii."
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of incising the arteries near the ears, called carotides.
Capitol segon.	"Chapter two."
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there occur cataracts or ulcers in the eyes or breast, and these are ancient, and cure cannot be effected by medicines, then the last remedy in this case is incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus you must do when you wish to incise those arteries which the sick person's head has near to it, and first rub that place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and also bind the neck of the sick person with some cloth; and consider well where the vein pulses; and the places for cutting on each side are over the places which are near the ears below, and they are hidden except in certain men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then mark with a thread the artery you wish to cut, and then incise each one with a scalpel of sharp point, making an incision entering into the bone, and let this be done along the breadth of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, enter the scalpel blade between the artery and cut it with your fingers at the incisions above mentioned.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two fingers' breadth, for when any vein is incised blood issues forth with a pulsating flow, which flows off by frequent flows.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear to your satisfaction, then you must measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers' breadth, and mark with a thread, and cut within the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And that which it is necessary to let flow of blood is a quantity equal to one sixth part, and sometimes more or less, and all this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the disease and the repletion of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of a phthisis, then cut that away, lest an ulcerous cautery should result.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with feathers and cloth lint, and then cure it with ointment within until it be healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of those arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When it happens that some ancient migraine or very severe headache occurs due to humid and hot qualities in the temples, or if it is an ancient vehement disease similar to these, and it is treated with the usual methods of medical cure without success, then we have proven in these diseases extraction of those arteries in the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the manner of operation and extraction of those arteries is this: Shave the hair from those which are in the temples; and understand that the artery appears on the temple where it is indicated by its pulsation, although it may be hidden in few men due to great thickness of flesh.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then let the neck of the disease be strengthened with some cloth; and then rub the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then take this scalpel which has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then cut the skin with that one easily until you reach the artery; and then open it there and extract that upwards to such an extent that you extract it from its sheaths and uncover those tunics which surround it on all sides.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the extreme end of a probe; and then cut one part of it according to how much its extremities are elongated and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not incised the blood will not come forth.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then let out of it one sixth part or at most three parts of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with double strong thread of cotton or long cords, so that putrefaction does not occur before the wound is consolidated and there is no flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then incise the superfluity which is between two lint layers; and do this at that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize it with a caustic cautery or cutlery cautery so that its extremities are incised, and this will take the place of that operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better to operate if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion, because cauterization helps those causes that promote humidifying qualities, and therefore it is better in this case.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary that in the extraction of arteries the place of cutting be smeared with good ointment, and that they be powdered decently with dry medicines to make the flesh grow, and then it should be cured with dressings until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while operating another time, blood begins to flow from the artery, then stop that blood either with caustic or with compressing the place of cutting, and strengthen your hand until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of those causes is present, then place your finger on the place until the blood coagulates, and then bore the place with cold water until the sharpness passes, and then strengthen it according to what is necessary.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is put lightly in extraction of artery is this: You cauterize the vein with this caustic cautery having two cuts, for you have cut both places with a probe, and then ignite each one separately, so that they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between its extremities may be elongated, because it is not completely consolidated with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the caustic:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the sharpness of the two cuts be thus
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if they are not very sharp, then it is better to have two cuts, for if they are very sharp with two cuts near each other, they approach too close and do not cut the flesh quickly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is held within them and the flesh is easily cut.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this operation is better than all others and is also easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space which is between the two cuts be as great as the thickness of your finger
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Concerning the cure of wounds from sharp and acid tears of the eyelids.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When there are acid tears and it is the wound of those veins which are over the forehead of the head, and no cause for its cure by medicine can be found, then sometimes the face of the patient becomes reddened and he feels on his forehead a sensation like that of ants crawling around. The eyelids become weak and moist so much so that their hairs stick together and the skin is scratched by the sharpness of the tears. These ancient authors advise in this operation for its cure, and no other cure should be sought.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And you should order the patient to shave the hairs which are on his forehead; and then make three incisions in the forehead equally distant according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of each incision is two fingers: let the first incision be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead; and the second according to the length a little above the movement of the lachrymal glands which are near the eye; and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And take care not to cut the arteries which are in both sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jaws.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	"And if each opening's space matches the amount of three mentioned."
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	"And if you have a sponge dressed in linen or dry cloths with which to wipe off the blood."
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	"And then insert the spatula of two pointed extremities, whose shape is that of the incision:"
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	"which is from the line between temples to the second incision."
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	"Carefully remove with that all the skin between two incisions up to the hip bone which is above it, and then do likewise from the midriff incision to the second incision."
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	"And then stretch this spatula and insert it again into the first incision another time using another instrument called a 'cutellar,' sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	"And pause the blade of that sharp one between the attached flesh and the skin, and pass through it within the bone and employ this to reach the midriff fissure, and cut away with that all vessels descending from the head to the heels."
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	"But if there is a continuity of incision up to here then do likewise in the midriff fissure unto the other fissure."
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	"And since blood will flow in great quantity at this point, compress the places of the junctures of the blood vessels together."
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then pause in each fissure along the cut with cotton wool dipped in vinegar and oil and vinegar wine, and see that it does not become inflamed."
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	"And on the third day untie the stitches and administer a large infusion of cold water or tea, and then care for it with basilicon ointment with rose oil and other remedies so that the wounds are healed."
Capitol .v.	"Chapter .v"
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	"Of the care of injuries by cauterization and of the heels descending from the parts within the head."
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	"When it happens that cauterization is done with sharp and continuous instruments, and the heels of the sick person are attenuated and small, and their gaze is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and from them the hairs fall out, and there is acute painful sensation in the forehead with consequent external pressure, then you should know that these materials and cauterization come only from small veins of the parts proceeding within."
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	"And the best care for these is this: command the patient to raise his forehead, and then incise a fissure in that at the middle of the forehead, a little across (beginning with the left temple and going to the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; and stretch your hand out from the lacertus muscles of the temples which are attached by mastication), until the bone is uncovered."
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	"Dry up all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth, and then fill in between the two lips of the fissure with cotton wool or with linen."
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	"And then strive above it with powders dipped in vinegar and oil so that it does not become inflamed."
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	"And when you have done this and see that the cauterization has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone where the flesh begins, and then care for it with a dry regimen which makes the flesh fall off, thus: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, mix them together, and make a plaster from them, and apply it to these wounds in order that the flesh may be renewed."
Capitol .vi.	"Chapter .vi"
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of treating that which falls into the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that falls into the ears is of four species: either it is a mineral like stone or similar to stone, such as iron and copper; or it is from a plant, like chickpeas or beans; or it is fluid, like water, vinegar and their similars; or some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when a stone falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, it closes the ear and prevents it from breathing, then extract the stone with some remedy of olive oil or sesame, applying it abundantly. And make them sneeze by certain conditions, blocking their nostrils during the onset of sneezing.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And also close the entrance of the ear with some pieces of cloth or wool, extending it over its parts above, because many times it is forgotten with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not extracted, then apply extraction of it with the instrument called "subtle epicicarian gesture," whose form is as follows:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is not extracted with the gesture, then apply extraction of it with a subtle hook of few loops.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not extracted by this, then make a cannula of silver and insert the extremity of the cannula into the channel of the ear, closing around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that nothing may escape except through the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And also extract it with a little wind with strong attraction, because many times it happens with this method that we have mentioned.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not extracted in this manner, then take a heated candle or sometimes prepared with which birds are caught by taking just a little bit of it and place it at the extremity of the ear, and also wrap around that gently placed spot.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert it into the channel of the ear with ease, and also dry out the ear from moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	"And if you forget not all causes we have recounted, then proceed to cut that which precedes the formation of an abscess or spasm."
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	"And the manner of cutting it is that you first sanctify the patient with the sacred oil and extract blood according to its virtue, then make a small incision between your thumb and index finger and turn the ear towards its parts, making a small fissure at the root of the ear near the thick part of it."
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And let the incision be crescent-shaped until it reaches the bone, and when the bone is exposed, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the wound quickly, and dress it until it is healed."
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	"And if the cause resides in the ear is one of those fatty substances that swell and become inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your examination, then take a thin and subtle spatula according to this form:"
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	"And perform the abscess of that fat which has fallen into the ear."
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	"And do not perform it when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause there in several parts, then extract what is inside with tweezers or subtle gestures, or through such an incision as we have mentioned, for the extraction will be easier."
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	"But in the case of water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze forcefully at the beginning and fill their ear with a soft cloth, then tilt their head over the affected ear, and if it does not come out, then take thin and sharp stones according to the length of the finger, heat them slightly on the fire, and have the patient insert one of those into the opening of their ear and jump up and down on one foot of that side, striking with another stone on top of the stone that is inside the ear."
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	"So continue this until all the water has been expelled."
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	"Now take some paper or cotton and burn one end of it in fire until half of it is burnt."
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	"And then take another cotton and do the same until all the water is burned away, and then remove it with a cannula as mentioned above about the stone extractor."
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	"If an animal enters that ear canal, whether it's a small creature or one similar to it, cure it as mentioned in the division; but if it is a large creature which appears in the neck wound, then remove it with tweezers and forceps, and its cause will be easier than all other causes that happen in the ear."
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	"But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, if you cure it with what has been mentioned in the division and in the treatise on distillation and still do not succeed, then you should examine the ear in sunlight."
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And then if you see any cause of the worms, then remove them with tweezers or fine forceps; but if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula which is narrow at one end and wide at the other, whose shape is like this:"
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	Enter the thin tip into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck strongly with it, doing this many times until all worms are removed.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	If you do not obey the aforesaid instructions, then close and seal the opening of the cannula with wax as mentioned earlier; afterwards administer distilled waters which have already been prescribed in previous treatments for worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillation.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And here is your funnel with which you will pour medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, of which this is its shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make it of silver or brass, narrow and straight, with a small hole at one end and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	Thus let it be made such that it fits into the concavity of the cannula, continuing here where it will be necessary
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the wand and wrap it around the end of the cannula decently, and then place oil in the concavity of the instrument, or juice of some herb, or whatever medicine you want in the cannula — which is now in the ear — and then place the wand with its tip down and squeeze gently with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the concavity of the instrument and the illness feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And whatever has been poured into the ear should be immediately cauterized with fire a little bit.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And make sure that whatever you distill into the ear is not too hot, for ear medications do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the treatment of earache.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes, some children come out of their mothers' wombs with closed anuses, and this has happened to some men, causing earache because of phlegm or flesh stuck there; sometimes the blockage is in the opening of the auditory canal which does not allow for sound, and sometimes it is outside at the openings.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the front of it, which does not admit sound, is among the most difficult to cure conditions.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	"And in that one where you succeed in finding the vein, then place your ear on the patient's solar plexus and listen."
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"Therefore if there is apparent oppression, open that small space with a subtle spatula whose form is like this:"
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	"For the end of it where its width is small, one part is pointed and the other is not; and let the spatula be of two lion's teeth in such a way that it does not harm the ear."
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	"And if the oppression is due to skin grown over the ear or its membrane, then use those subtle tweezers and carefully cut that violent inflammation so as to remove all the skin."
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	"And if oppression is in the entrance of the ear, then take a thin lion's ray and heat it slightly over fire, and carefully place that within the flesh of the ear."
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	"And therefore if you find oppression with that which the patient draws with facility, for the gravity of his hearing, ease that oppression with facility; and take care not to plague the nerves of the ear."
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And carefully insert into the ear drops of it according to the quantity of the width of the wick which you have inserted in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plug; or that you take some wax and insert that into ears and powder over it thrice and use it; and if sometimes the ear is already apostematous, then it is necessary that you extract the wax and replace it with another wax which you will envelop in cerot made with rose oil until the apostema is cauterized; and carefully cure it until it is healed."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	"But if it happens that there is a flow of blood, then submerge some linen or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which you restrict the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise of distillation."
Capitol .viii.	"Chapter VIII."
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	"Treatment for eye inflammation that occurs in eyelids."
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	"Eyelid inflammation sometimes causes tearing, sometimes they are dry."
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	"You should hold those hands while having them raised or lowered, and then carefully separate those hands from their roots, and slowly lower them onto the places indicated."
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	"If there is pain with blood flow, then cauterize those with a fine antimonial cautery."
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	"And the best cauterization is when the incisions are made and often retaken until there remains no cause for their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return."
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	"Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids."
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Often, swelling occurs in the eyelids due to some cause which is similar to hardness and toughness, and for this reason it is called hardness.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	"And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the left eyelid above."
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation in this case is that you should consider whether the swelling appears on the outside of the eyelid and is swollen all over; and its cause will be light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision along the width of that [swelling], and then carefully cut it open all around with ease, and then raise it up and sever it.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if the incision of that [swelling] is not apparent unless you press and penetrate the eyelid little by little with an incision, then it will not be known for any cause.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the swelling is large, then you should adjust it with stitches; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	But if it is small, no harm will come to that one because the ointment for that restores it and makes it grow again.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling declines towards the inside of the eyelid, then you should lift up the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a hook, unless you make an incision; press it all around, and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, then it will be known for no cause.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after making the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and cure that place with something that makes it grow again until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	On the treatment of inflammation in the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	"Eyelid inflammation is common, especially in children, causing eye irritation and difficulty seeing due to excessive tearing."
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	"Therefore, these individuals often rub their eyes and face while awake and asleep. Their eyelids are swollen with excessive moisture, which is already covered by inflammation. There is a visible indication of infection in the eye. When you press on this location with your fingers, you can feel the pulsating heat."
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	"Some method of operation is required for those who pause their head on the side they are facing, draping themselves and their foot over it. First, measure the circumference according to the quantity of earthworm present in each section. Then place the circle around that area and press firmly with your fingers all around so as to accumulate pus in the middle of the circle. Finally, make an incision with a scalpel along the width, ensuring that the incision is not larger than that made during phlebotomy."
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	"When opening the head wound, ensure that you reach all the way to the pus, as in many cases it will ooze out through the incision like a white, viscous fluid."
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	"Then remove those drapes which you had wrapped around the parts using your fingers and shake them between your right and left hand until all pus has been shaken out."
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	"And be careful not to insert the scalpel too deep into the incision, lest you pierce the eye or cause injury."
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	"But if pus does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then insert the scalpel gently into the incision until pus begins to flow out. Then remove it as we have described. Next, rinse drapes in water and vinegar and apply them to the location, and finally powder those drapes."
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	"And some also use salt and apply it to the concavity of the incision so that any remaining pus may be drawn out."
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And finally, dress the wound until it is healed."
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	"But if you encounter an abscess in the location, then treat it with cataplasms made of leadwort until it heals."
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	"Of ways to examine the eye."
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When the eyelids are born with defects due to improperly grown lashes, then they affect the eye and cause diseases such as constant tears, inflammation of the eyelids, and damage to the eye tissue, which is called entropion of the eye. There are four methods of treatment: either by cauterization with fire; or with acute medication as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done through incision and suturing; or with canthotomy as I have said before.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then gently lift the patient's head towards them; next, with their left hand, they should turn the eyelid of the affected eye inward. If it turns inwards properly, that is good. But if not, then insert a needle into that part of the eyelid where the lashes grow and make the needle penetrate upwards close to the edge of the eyelid where the lashes grow. Then pull the thread out from above the eyelid and turn that eyelid inward with their finger.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And next, make an incision in the middle of the eyelid just below the lashes with a scalpel entering the larger lacrimal gland into the smaller one. Then remove the thread and pause near the eyelid using small cotton swabs or cloth, and then press on the eyelid with your finger so that it forms like a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, the shape should be according to the amount of eversion of the eyelid, because this is already varied among individuals. Therefore, some people require that a larger portion of the eyelid be incised according to the amount by which the eyelid has turned outwards.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And next, make an incision with the scalpel along both lines that you have marked out, starting from the larger lacrimal gland and entering into the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	If your incision is close to the natural lashes so that it matches the thickness of the reed (i.e., not too deep).
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then take forceps and grasp one of the two ends of the thread. Then cut off all of it, and next join together both lips of the wound using silk or fine wool thread and cleanse away any blood. Then make what is superfluous from the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some adhesive substance if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then leave the suture of the threads in place for three or four days, and then remove it and care for the wound.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the plaster on without removing the suture and care for it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated due to the sealing of the plaster and its adherence. But sewing is better. This is what the ancient authorities say.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, if there is concern about the illness, it is good to operate, and there is no reason to fear doing so.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method of sewing, which is to mark out on the eyelid a figure like a leaf of myrtle, and then raise the eyelid using three forceps separated and gathered together in this shape:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if this is not possible, then hold the forceps and do not let go of them. Then take a needle with thread inserted into it and put it in the middle of the figure. Then insert one end of the thread near the larger lacrimal gland and the other end near the smaller lacrimal gland. Then adjust both ends of the threads equally between your fingers, and then raise your hand while lifting them up gently so that the entire thread marked out is raised as we have recommended.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then join together both lips of the plaster with a suture, and care for it until it has healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess forms over your incision or wound, cut into the abscess with a scalpel and drain it, and apply a poultice.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid are turned inward. In this case, you should use the method we have described for incision; but stitching in each case is more artful.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To stitch with needles, do it like this:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	"Now you must turn the eyelid and cut the figure that lies beneath, according to what has been described; then with art make two tubes or two thin needles whose length is equal to the length of the eyelid and their width less than the width of the spatula."
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	"And now you have already cut into the ends of each half, where you hold the threads."
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	"Next, gently bring together what is superfluous of the eyelid on both sides and press the tubes of each half with great firmness; leave it thus for a few days so that the thread may die, be rejected, and fall out by itself."
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is delayed, then cut it with the scissors; next clean the wound until it heals."
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	"So when it has healed, the eyelid will be raised and the hairs will not touch (the eye)."
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	"And this is how you make the two tubes which you should make according to this form:"
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	"and they should have exactly the same length and width, neither more nor less."
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	"Of raising hairs that are sticking into the eye when the hair is hard"
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	"When the hairs are not natural, hard and sharp and sticking into the eyes, then the operation is this: you should take a fine needle and insert it under that fine thread of cedar and lion's hair, and carefully adjust its ends without hurting each one in any way."
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	"And let the length of the threads be as much as half a palm (about 7.6 cm)."
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	"And next take another fine thread and tie it around that one if you wish."
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	"And then place the patient's head on a suitable support and keep it near the light so that your work may be clear, for this operation is subtle and precise."
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	"And next insert the needle into the root of the hair that needs to be removed and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you pull out that one from above the natural hair."
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	"And then pull out the hair and insert this one in its place; and let there be one, two or three hairs at most, not more."
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	"And next pull your hand away from that until the hair is completely pulled out with its root in the eyelid along with the natural hair."
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	"But if it is pulled out but not completely removed with its root, then pull gently from both sides using the thread that you have made with it until it is completely removed with its root underneath."
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	"And then examine the eyelid with the eye because then you will pull out that thread and knot each one and close the eyelid, leaving it like that for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over good flesh."
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	"And if the hair is too short, then adjust a long natural hair and raise it with that one or let it grow for some space until it grows longer, and then raise that."
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	"Of treating the pain that comes in the eyelid from above."
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	"When the eyelid suffers from pain, it is due to the contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, on either side, due to poor healing of a wound or cut or burn, and this is called 'leporina', which may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds or cuts or burns, or by resembling those who are ill."
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"The manner of operating on this is to divide that contraction and separate the eyelid's lips, and place in it a wick of linen soaked in water, and tie those together until they are healed."
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	"And it is not necessary to use the treatments that dry and constrict because if you do that, it returns to causing pain worse than before."
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	"Use on that causes moistness such as fenugreek, and soak it in water with cooking salt and honey or diacylon, which is melted with some oil, and immerse the wick in it and treat with that."
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	"And the treasure of your treatment is to persevere with all your strength until nothing remains unhealed as at the beginning."
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	"And this operation that we have described is only a slight correction of eyelid inflammation that does not restore its original form."
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	"Of treating the pain that occurs in the outer corner of the eyelid."
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	"This inflammation that occurs in the outer corner of the eyelid is called 'ptosis' properly speaking. It may be due to some natural cause or other accidental causes."
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	"Accidental causes include wounds, cuts, burns, and similar afflictions."
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	"The method of operating on this is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing from the left lacrimal duct to the right one until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	"And then extend the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise with a broad scalpel."
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	"And then if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, that is good. But if not, take the thread and place it in the cut shape, and with that turn the eyelid over and close both incisions on the outer side of the eyelid."
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	"And let both ends of the incisions meet at two angles of the incision that you have made, so that when they come together they form an angle with a well-shaped figure."
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	"And this figure is the Greek letter lambda (λ)."
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	"And then remove that flesh on the side where it tapers towards the outer corner of the eyelid."
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with thread, and then treat them with moisturizing medicines and bandages until they are healed."
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	"And if inflammation occurs due to a cut or suture or burn, then it is necessary to make an incision with a scalpel over the hairs of the eyelid as described previously."
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	"And then separate with forceps between the two lips as we have said before."
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	"In summary of the speech on treating inflammation when it is above or below, follow the operation according to how the inflammation is prepared, and that is in many diverse forms."
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	"And the wise artisan always prepares various methods for treating inflammation in every possible way to restore its natural form or close to it, according to what suits that condition and the operation and instruments used in the best conditions."
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea."
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	"When this adhesion occurs in many people such that the eyelid is stuck above with a film of mucus and movement is difficult and natural functions are prevented, then it is necessary to insert the outer end of the thread under the eyelid and lift it up or extend it with forceps."
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	"And then incise the adhesion with a fine scalpel that is not too sharp to avoid hurting the eye during the operation."
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	"And let your incision be such that it easily removes that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed."
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	"And then apply salt water to rinse the eye, or distilled rosewater dissolved in water."
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	"And then separate the eyelid from the eye with forceps and apply compresses of lanolin-soaked wool to the eye. On the third day use consolidating ointments until it is healed."
Capitol .xvi.	"Chapter XVI."
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of a nail and the excision of flesh from the lacrimals.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that a nail is of two kinds: one is nerve-like, and resembles hard cartilage; the other is non-nerve-like, resembling thickened white humor, which, when touched by iron, may be forcibly severed without the iron entering it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both species begin only at the larger lacrimal, which gradually decreases until it covers the sight and prevents light and its movement from passing through it.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the manner of operating in the incision of it is that the patient should raise his head towards the ceiling, and widely open his eyes, and lift up the eyelid with your hand, and carefully take hold of the nail with forceps and extend it upwards.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and insert it under the nail a little way with horsehair or cowhair or oxhair or similar hair, or strong thread, and fold over the tip of the needle bit by bit and insert it into the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and tie the nail with thread; and extend it upwards, and cut away with the hair the side of the nail which covers the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you should follow that with the hair behind it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you should incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift up the natural cartilage of the lacrimal so that by cutting into it there would be no continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with its edge extended or tied with thread, as we have said, and then it should be cut away with this kind of spoon:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	"Be mindful so that with the scalpel you do not touch the corneal tunic and that it ruptures, causing the pupil to be perforated."
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"Near the incision place a bit of salt or clean oil of sinapis and let it remain there for another day; then treat it with water so that it can heal."
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	"If the nail is not attached and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that place, then sometimes this type of nail can be cured with medicines, and it will heal like the rest."
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	"If you wish to incise there, then first open the wound of the disease and take a scalpel made from lion's claw with sharpness according to this form:"
am subtilitat.	"with subtlety."
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	"And if it happens that it is rarified and congealed and sticks in that way, then distill some of your saliva into the wound with clean oil of sinapis or with rose oil or with crushed salt, and cover the wound overnight."
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	"And again perform the operation on it until all that belongs to it is removed, so that instead of a tumor there may be an ulcer in the wound, because sometimes when you leave it alone, the tumor will begin to heal."
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	"And again perform your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	"The membrane of the lachrymal gland, if it is noticed in the wound causing great harm, should be suspended with a clamp. Then cut into it there through one opening only, and do not extend the incision lest tear fluid flow out."
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	"And again distill rose oil and oil of sinapis into the lachrymal gland until it is healed."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter XVII."
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	"Of Incision of an Abscess and of That Which Is Born from Adherent Flesh in the Wound."
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	A lump of flesh may sometimes be born in the eyes of some individuals, and it is pressed upon and covers the pupil, or approaches or presses upon the eyelids, forcing them open from outside, appearing like a ball of ivory.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The operation in this case is that the patient places their head on the operating table; and then carefully opens the eyes of that person and collects all that flesh with suitable scissors to that end, taking it with a forceps or with tweezers; and then cuts the flesh at its beginning so that it is entirely finished with the scissors, guarding yourself from the eye not to let anything fall during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be that with which you cut those [tissues], or use the spatula we have mentioned in the incision of the nail, or small forceps with which you collect what comes afterwards according to the form that this chapter will explain.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And when your incision is completed and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with finely crushed salt or distilled into powder for rogues and similar to the medicines corrosives, and cover the eye from outside with an egg white until it is assured of cauterization.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remains some cause of inflammation and the blood is not completely cauterized, and you fear cauterization apostema, then leave the eye alone and treat that apostema with what will ease it, and then repeat this operation until it is healed; and similarly do for the flesh adhered to the eye in this condition.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But you must ensure that all care of the eye is done naturally or accidentally without using iron instruments, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that member has recovered from that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of collection of pus in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	"The veins become hardened over time, hindering their proper function; thus, it must be revealed through a longitudinal cut after several days."
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	"Therefore, at the outset, you must consider whether the hernia in question is strong and not due to another condition resembling a hernia. Then you should collect that hernia."
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	"And then you should order the patient to hold their breath and suspend those veins with an ounce or two of water according to your discretion, using a fine doubled thread like this:"
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	"Or gradually introduce two ounces of water into the body following this method:"
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	"And then those veins should be ligated with fine threads carefully and gently, wiping away the blood at each step until you see that those veins are completely detached from the hernia and turned back."
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	"And be careful not to tie the hernia too tightly with the spatula's edges. If your operation is performed during the middle of the day facing the sun, be particularly firm in your technique so that you only ligate those veins and do not include any others."
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	"And when you have completed this, then distill rose water or pomegranate juice onto the hernia chief to burn away anything remaining from the tumor with its sharpness."
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	"But if this is not possible for you to do all at once, then plaster the entire area with whatever relieves pain and allow it to rest for several days until the pain has ceased and there is assurance of a clean wound."
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	"And afterward, continue treating it according to the usual manner until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	"And this is the form of the forceps:"
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter XIX."
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	"For the reduction of deviation of the nose."
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	"If you treat nasal deviation with cauterization or an irritating medicine according to the recommendation given and it does not heal, then do not incise over the abscess until it has matured, and then extract all the fluid that is inside it, opening up the bone so that it is exposed."
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in the wound, then clean it with an instrument of this shape:"
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	"And it is called 'sharp headed', and should be made of iron, with the head round like this, pierced with holes made by a file or awl for subtle puncture."
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	"And press that over the corrupted part of the bone, then turn it between your fingers and press gently until you know that the corruption has been scraped away."
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	"And after doing this several times, then dry out the wound with drying and styptic agents."
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	"So if the wound is consolidated and there is healthy new flesh growing in it, and the skin has healed around it for 40 days without any recurrence of inflammation or abscess formation, then you know that it has healed."
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	"But if not, then it is necessary to reduce the fissure back into the shape of the nose, and this is done in the following way: first, uncover the bone with a chisel or cauterize it with an irritating medicine until the bone is exposed. Then take a drill like this:"
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	"The end of the iron is triangular, and its body is thin and gradually comes to a point at the end."
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	"And then place the drill on the bone near the lacrimal bone. Then hold your hand a little way off and turn the drill until it has penetrated all the way through the bone. You will feel pain when it hits the opposite side, at which point you should withdraw your hand."
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	"So then dry out the wound with styptic and drying medicines as before."
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	"So when the flesh has grown together and the wound is healed, then the material that used to flow outwards returns to its place in the nose, so this is a lighter form of pus."
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	On the reduction of prominence of the brow.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the brow projects excessively and there is no disfigurement or loss of sight resulting from it, then it is necessary to alleviate this condition by following this procedure: first, perform scarifications and cupping on the back of the neck for good suction; then apply a liniment made of aloe, myrrh, and tragacanth gum over the brow, followed by applying an emplaster made of quicklime powder.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	"And the way to prepare this powder is to take some quicklime and fold each piece of cloth into four layers. Then make the powder from this."
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	"And then apply these powders one over another according to the amount needed for the brow's prominence."
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	"And then apply a hard cloth with strong compression over these powders. Then perform cupping again with suction without scarification. Finally, remove the cups and leave the brow bandaged day and night."
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	"But if during this time the bandage becomes loose, then it must be tightened."
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	"And remove the bandage day and night as mentioned earlier."
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	"And if the brow is reduced enough, that's good. But if not, then repeat the application of the plaster with powders, compression and cupping until it is healed."
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	"Regarding the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic."
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	"When there is disruption in the uveal tunic and it protrudes prominently like a grain of sand between the eyelids, and appears round as a man's eye due to this, and you wish to incise it, then do as follows: first insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from below upwards, then insert another needle on the side of the lacrimal gland, let the first needle penetrate and follow its position; then incise the location of the double ligament and pull with it the edge of the uvea around the needle."
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	"Then remove the needle and pause while placing some lint infused in egg albumen on the wound, allowing time for the thread to become moist with the blood."
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then dress the wound with this, so that it may heal well, until the plague is healed."
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	"And sometimes gather all the edges with a circle of cloth around the wound's prominent elevation, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula that reaches the bottom of the wound, allowing the purulent humor to run out, and let the wound descend and heal quickly."
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	"And then ensure that it is healed well."
Capitol .xxii.	Capital XXII
De curacio de alconati.	Of the treatment of sciatica
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This condition called sciatica is nothing but pain that runs along the leg like descending water, not the one above.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	To treat this condition, have the patient sit on a prepared chair and lean their head back into your hands. Then find where the pain is coming from and stop it from spreading further down the leg. Then cover them with a blanket and let them rest in that position so they can see what you're doing.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend any further, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the flow of pain has not been directed downwards as previously described, then have the patient sit between your palms and take a thin spatula to press gently on the skin above the connective tissue around the junction of the conjunctiva and tunica cornea at the crown (i.e. the area indicated) until the pain is released.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once you have released the pain, then mix honey with water or with boiled fenugreek and honey water to make a caudate mixture.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And also treat it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	**Chapter XXII.**
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	About treating water descent from the head.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already spoken of the types of urine in division and which is convenient to perforate, indicating it according to health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you should make the patient sit between your thighs on a chair and hold their head down with your hands tightly.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their left eye if it is the left ear where the water is, or place your right hand there if it is the right ear.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take a bandage if it is the left ear, or with your left hand if it is the right ear.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the end of the bandage near the crown, as thick as a ray from the ear towards the inner corner of the eye, and then gently press the bandage with your hand over it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the ear canal until you feel that the bandage has reached the eardrum.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	The length of the bandage should be measured from the front to match the distance between the pupil and the end of the blackness in the ear canal, which is the crown of the ear; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the ear drum.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the bandage in the ear canal where the water is, and then quickly pull it out once or twice. If the water drains immediately afterwards, then the patient's hearing should improve immediately, and the bandage will be wet from the earwax.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then wait a moment; if the water has drained, then place another bandage in the ear canal, but be careful not to push it too far.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And then if it does not drain, carefully remove the bandage and gently rotate it a little bit inside the ear canal to try to break up any wax. Then dissolve a small amount of table salt in some warm water and use that to rinse out the ear canal. Finally, place a cotton wool ball or piece of lanolin-infused gauze soaked in rose oil into the ear opening to help absorb any remaining moisture.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But those who are from our time, pause over that command with a sigh of relief.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the bandage does not enter easily due to hardness of the earwax - as is sometimes the case with men who have hard earwax - then you should use a curette called an "albired" which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then carefully insert the curette into that junction, and do not push your hand too far into the ear canal. And if you cannot make a way for the bandage, do not proceed further.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	Then gently insert the bandage as explained earlier.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	Before beginning your work, ensure that the patient is lying down comfortably on their side in a dark room where they can remain still without moving.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	Ensure that the water you are using is clear and does not contain any impurities or contaminants, and do not wet the patient's hair on either side of their head.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And ensure that the bandage is well positioned according to its shape on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then remove that bandage in the dark room and expose the patient's ear canal to fresh air. Allow them to see some light for a short time, then return the bandage to its position on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	You should not perform this procedure during the hours of fasting or immediately after taking medication.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	Be sure to do this gently and carefully, as water can easily enter too quickly and forcefully into the ear canal with great regard for the patient's comfort.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess forms, then you should remove the bandage on the seventh day and adjust it with something that will help drain the abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then uncover the ear and place a dressing over the face of the opening to direct the discharge away from the eye for several days while keeping the patient in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually remove that bandage and explain the causes to them.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	Know that even in the classroom, it is not always possible for a student to observe everything at times, and therefore you should be careful about performing this operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And it has come to our knowledge that some of those who are skilled in this art have said that they create a fire in the ear using a heated probe, with which they suck out the water.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But as far as we know, this method has not been seen in our land nor is it mentioned in any of the books by the ancients. Therefore, it may be a new method.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are some methods for performing ear syringing which can serve as guides for those who are unfamiliar with them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And these ear syringes can be made of silver or iron, and their ends should be carefully crafted with this triangular subtlety, with the tip being sharp like this:
Capitol .xxiv.	**Capital XXIV.**
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of flesh torn in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When various pieces of flesh grow together in the nose and some cause is assembled that resembles the sting of a scorpion or a polyp's growth; this illness is called polyps because it resembles that fish.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And its flesh is cancerous, inflamed, and dark in color; but if it is not flesh of lion, then it is not of dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore in that which is not a fraudulent flesh of lion nor cancerous, you should make the illness cease between your palms and expose it to the sun, and rub its nose, and pluck out those pieces of flesh there.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And properly extract that from the parted flesh, and properly incise what you have comprehended of those with sharp and subtle spatula, from one part until you know that all the flesh is removed; for if there remains any cause by which amputation is possible, then remove it also with one of the subtle instruments easily, so that nothing remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if there is an ulcer with blood or occurs an abscess, then you should stay until it is necessary; for if they are malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize there until all the blood has been extracted and all cavities have been cleaned.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And properly let it be dressed in the nose with proper incisions of wine and water or vinegar.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is opened and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then you should know that it is healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you should know that within there is flesh dead in the full pus of the bones of the nose to which amputation has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore you should insert filiform in there where there is some thickness, and tie it with knots, and pause between each knot the quantity of the finger or less, and remove the illness and insert one extremity of the thread into the nose with the hook or with any other cause that is possible for it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after this has been done, that it draw its odor through the canals of the nose, and be exhaled over its palate, for often children at school have seen it done in such manner, and it is an easy thing for whoever wishes to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And properly pause the two extremities of the thread, one extremity that emerges over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and properly apply a suture of flesh with the knots that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is joined with the knots of the thread.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And properly extract the thread, and pause in the nose with the abstraction of blood once a day, and do this for three days or more until the corrosive ointment has corrupted all that is raw of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And properly at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose a lead canula for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you desire a dry cure, use this one.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument called capipurge-maker with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	Make it of silver or brass, similar to a small open lamp, like a small pan, and the mouth similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed canula like a tube, and the opening of the instrument called capipurge-maker should be flat and open; to which attach it at the back end, with which you hold it when you squeeze out the oil or whatever liquid or extractable substance you desire.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this is the price of capipurgi: Take of castor oil, white balm, ginger, saffron, long pepper, asafetida, ephedron and spica nard. vi cumfizeys with beet juice and celery juice, and make them into pills, and let one pill be taken with hot water, and let it be thrown into the nose of the sick person who is lying down on his back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of sneezes from the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times a sneeze happens at the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and fomented in several days within which much attention should be paid to its regard.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And therefore you should insert that into the beginning of the appearance of it, and erase all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	"And next apply a cautery or medicine that burns where it is placed."
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	"But if the incision is delayed until it has become magnificent [i.e., grown large], then consider whether it is hard, tough, dark in color and lacking sensation. If so, do not touch that with iron, for it is a cancerous aposteme; many times have I seen this aposteme kill its master through his great folly towards him who had made the incision."
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	"And if the aposteme is of a bright touch and not dark in color, and if incision is possible throughout that entire area, then evacuate the morbid matter and incise without fear, and dress the wound with something that dries and constrains until it is healed."
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	"On the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been disrupted by plague or injury."
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when discontinuity occurs in one of these cartilages (i.e., the nose, lips, or ear), little is gained from that operation except among certain people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it happens to someone that there is some cause of discontinuity in one of those areas due to a fresh wound with its blood, then join the two lips of the wound together with suture and dress it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	"And if the lips of discontinuity are already separated and each is free from inflammation, then you must excise each portion of its visible border until there comes forth blood."
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	"And then join the two lips together with suture and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder on them and let them rest for three days or two, and place a plaster of diaphoretic powder or some other consolidating plaster over it, and leave it like that for two or three days, and then remove the plaster and replace it until the wound closes by itself, and dress it with an ointment until it is healed."
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	"However, the method of suturing is that you approximate the discontinuity either with needles as we have recommended for abdominal suture, or else you approximate it with thread as you know how to do."
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	"On the extraction of those causes that come out between the two lips in wounds within."
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times it happens to many people that in the wounds within their lips there are hard abscesses resembling boils of ears, some small and others larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you must cut open the lips and incise each of those hardnesses from every part, and then perform abscess drainage by inserting a probe well-tressed until blood flows freely, and then wash it with vinegar and dress it with an astringent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"Regarding the incision of attached skin in the gums."
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	"Many times they press upon the attached gum which they call 'albulus', therefore you should suspend that one with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise that part until it bleeds."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	"And for that purpose pause upon the wound with some troche of three parts or other powders, either styptic or caustic."
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	"And if that flesh returns, you should then incise it again and cauterize it with fire so that it will not return again."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De razo de dentz am ferr.	"Regarding the removal of teeth with forceps."
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	"When on the surface of the divided teeth and those of foreign origin, and between the attached gums there are rough, thick, hard, and sometimes black spots which appear yellow or greenish with pus running between the gum and causing the teeth to appear loose."
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	"And therefore you should make an incision between the two gums and place a bandage on it afterwards, and scrape those teeth where these rough spots appear, causing sand-like matter to come out from them without any cause, and this is due to their blackness and yellowness or other defects which have become altered."
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	"Therefore if that which is spoken in the beginning of this reason is not so, then you should repeat this reason upon those teeth on another day and a second time and a third time until it comes to the final statement which you desire."
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	"And know that teeth require various kinds of forceps with different shapes and forms, depending on how you prepare your operation."
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	"And therefore the forceps with which a tooth is extracted from its socket is different from the forceps used to extract teeth in other ways, and these forms of forceps should be prepared by you, as you will see shortly:"
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
D’eradicacio de dentz.	"On the extraction of teeth."
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	"You should first relieve the tooth of its pain with all haste and care in every extraction of it, for there is no cause why you should postpone the view of it when it is extracted, because it is a substance which becomes elevated at the time of its extraction."
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	"But when it is necessary to extract that tooth, you should firmly be certain what is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives and goes from one tooth to another which is healthy, and you extract that one and yet the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have seen by experience in operations of barbers."
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	"Therefore when you are certain what tooth is painful, and know it well, then you should scrape around the tooth with a spatula having some virtue in it until it has dissolved from the gum of all its parts, and then remove that with your fingers, or with fine forceps little by little until that is completely removed."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	"And then place the strong forceps with good purchase or firm pressure on it, and hold the head of the diseased tooth between your fingers so that you may not damage it, and extract the tooth in a straight manner so that you do not break it, nor give greater pain to the diseased person."
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	"And therefore if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it behind the tooth on all sides with ease and effort so that its removal may be facilitated as was done at the beginning."
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	"But if the tooth is decayed or eaten away, then you should fill that cavity with cloth and strengthen it with the extremity of a subtle thread so that it may not break at the time of your constriction upon it with forceps."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	"And you should work carefully with scraping around all parts of the gum and beware of your strength so that you do not break it and cause further damage to it, and return upon the diseased part because of the malice which is greater than the first pain."
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	"And beware that you do not do what ignorant and reckless barbers do in their haste and boldness concerning the extraction of teeth, without administering what we have recommended; for often they bring great diseases upon men which are harder to cure than they were to extract, and some of them leave behind all or some of those roots, or extract that one with some bones of the jaw as we have often witnessed."
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	"And then after the extraction of it, let the mouth be washed with warm water or vinegar with salt."
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	"And if there is bleeding after that, as often happens, then take some quantity of the plant sage and sprinkle it on the wound, and if this does not stop the bleeding, cauterize."
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	"The shape of the forceps and subtle tweezers with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should be of long length, short handle and thick, so that they may not bend when you use them."
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	"And they should be thus shaped with thick handles within which when you grasp with those forceps they may not bend, and have short extremities."
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	"And they should be made of wrought iron, straight at the extremities, and at the extremities of those there should be teeth into which one tooth enters between another and grasps firmly by constriction. And sometimes the extremities of those are in the shape of a bird's beak called ciconia, that is to say, broad, and they have strong constriction."
Capitol .xxxi.	**Chapter LXXXI.**
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	**Of the Extraction of Teeth and the Breaking of the Bones of the Jaw That Are Locked.**
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth that has become rotten and some cause remains, then you should place yourself beside the spot with caution for one day or two until the spot becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or forceps whose ends are shaped like those of a bird called a ciconia or glove.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends of them are made within thus like a file or rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not succeed with this extraction using these forceps or forceps, then you should cut into the flesh and uncover all the roots and insert the instrument called an elevator, of which the shape is like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short, thick end, and not be pointed lest it break.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore if the root is not extracted by this means, then help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The second tool should be triangular in shape and have a very sharp point.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And then you will be helped with this tool having two prongs, of which the following is its form:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	"And with other instruments which are used for filing teeth; because much help is done with this instrument which resembles an awl, and this is the form:"
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	"The triangular extremity is bent or shortened, which should have some thickness, and not too sharp so as not to be torn."
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	"Moreover, the instruments used for removing teeth are similar to other instruments."
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	"But the skilled and subtle artist finds for himself, according to what he understands about the operation and various illnesses; because there are diseases which the ancients did not give or provide with proper instruments, due to the shapes of different species."
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth are broken or shattered, then it should be carefully cured with appropriate instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and this is the gesture:"
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	"There is some small thickness within him, little by little, and it should be tightly held or bound with the mouth so that it does not escape until all of the bone is hollowed out. Then restore the area with appropriate medicines."
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"If in the bone there is a small opening, then immediately remove that part and its darkness, and cure within until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter XXXII.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	"Of the treatment of prominent teeth above the others."
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude beyond their natural course due to deformity of shape, especially in women and particularly elderly women, it is necessary for you to consider: if one tooth is not close to another tooth and no rearrangement or splint can be made thereupon, then that tooth should be extracted. But if the tooth is attached to another tooth, then incise that tooth with this instrument of which this is the form; it resembles a pork trotter and should be made from Indian steel with an extremely sharp tip.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be such that you cut through that tooth in three days due to the hardness of the tooth, and do not damage any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is an erupted tooth requiring reduction, then grind it down with an Indian steel file of which this is the form
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it all be made of Indian steel and well sharpened; let it have many small pointed ends like a file with which the teeth are made into needles, with which the tooth is ground down little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or injured.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And finally grind it down at the end, and polish it with a soft pumice stone
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth whose edge is broken and irritates the tongue, then you should grind down that edge until its roughness is smoothed out and flattened so that the tongue does not rub against it and speech is not impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of restoring damaged teeth with gold or silver foil
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When it happens that teeth are damaged by concussion and removal due to percussion or a fall, and the patient cannot chew properly despite your efforts with medications meant to promote healing, then know that those which have been strengthened with gold foil, not silver, remain strong for many days. Silver tends to tarnish and become brittle over time, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the foil be of such thinness and fineness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. The way to prepare it is to take the foil and fold it double over two healthy teeth, and then twist it in two places between the broken parts until the foil reaches the healthy part of the other tooth.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then carefully work the foil into the broken part where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and ease so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your grasp be firm with which you hold the foil between the roots of the teeth so that it does not slip out.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and tuck them away in each place with care, and fold them over and hide them between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then press it down tightly like this with a stone.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it comes loose or breaks off, strengthen it again or those with another piece of foil in the same manner at all times.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of the teeth and the way to prepare two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in these examples:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	"When a tooth returns to its original position or two, and they are placed back in their places as recommended, and they remain."
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	"And it is not done by anyone else but these skilled artisans."
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	"Sometimes it is appropriate to use cattle bone for some cause, and it is made into a form like a tooth, placed in the location where there's a tooth deficiency, and tightened as mentioned before, and remains and serves with that for a long time."
Capitol .xxxiv.	Here comes sentence number two:
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	"The incision of the ligament that reaches the tongue, preventing speech."
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	"This ligament which comes from the tongue sometimes occurs naturally or is present at birth, but it may also be acquired due to injury that has already healed."
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	"The operation is as follows: Have the patient lie on their back with their head elevated. Pull out the tongue and make an incision through that nerve ligament along its length where the tongue has been freed from its attachment."
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	"But if there is any hardness or resistance there, and this is due to scar tissue from a previous injury, then use forceps to grasp and cut through it along the length you have already incised in the ligament until the resistance is overcome."
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	"And be careful not to make any fissure in the front of the flesh, and do not cut too deeply or cause bleeding."
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	"And then rinse the wound with warm water or vinegar and gauze, and apply a bandage to keep the tongue in place each night until it has healed completely."
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	"But if there is bleeding, apply pressure with a wet compress of lint; but if the bleeding persists, then cauterize the area with a hot iron that is suitable for this purpose."
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat it with the usual remedies until it is healed."
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	"On the removal of a ranula from under the tongue."
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	"Sometimes, an ulcer appears on the tongue resembling a small tumor and preventing it from functioning properly. This can be quite serious."
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	"The operation involves opening the patient's mouth facing the sun to examine the ulcer."
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	"If you find it black or hard and the patient feels no pain, then do not touch that area as it is cancerous."
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	"But if it appears white and moist, then you should use a probe to touch it gently. If it bleeds during the procedure, pause for a while until the bleeding stops, as this indicates that there is a vein present."
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then return to your work until you have completed it. Then clean the wound with vinegar and salt water, and dress it with another dressing until it heals."
Capitol .xxxvi.	"Chapter XXXVI."
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	"On the removal of ulcers from the ears and those located in the throat, as well as other kinds of ulcers."
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	"When a swelling appears in the throat, it is often due to glands that have become inflamed. Sometimes these swellings appear externally and are called 'earlobe-like' growths. If you treat them with water as previously described and they do not heal, consider whether the ulcer is hard, black, or painless. In such cases, do not touch it with an iron."
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	"And if the ulcer is red and has a large root, then do not touch it with an iron because of the bleeding. Let it be until it ripens, and then you will remove it or it will break open on its own."
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	"But if the ulcer is white, hard, and has a thin root, then it should be incised."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And the operation on him is that you consider, before your operation, if he has already rested the apostema of him caut with rest complete or if it is diminished with some diminution; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in its place, and open his mouth, and the servant taking between his hands presses the tongue of him leaving with a most noble instrument, of which this is the form:"
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	"And it should be made of silver or of brass, and be thin like a razor."
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	"Then, when you press the tongue with that one and see the apostema, then cut him the head vein, now take hold of it and place it in the clamp, and pull it outwards as much as you can."
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Otherwise, if any cause from the clothes, now cut into that with the aforementioned instrument of which this is the form:"
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	"And it is like forceps, but its extremities are curved, so that the point of each one is on the side of the other, very sharp, which should be made of iron, tempered."
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	"But if this instrument is not present to you, now cut that with a scalpel of which this is the form: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other."
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	"And after you have cut one vein, cut the other in the same manner of cutting, and then wash away the wound with water rubbed."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of oak bark or myrtle leaves and similar things that have the power to stop bleeding, until the flow of blood is stopped, and then heal it until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	"And sometimes we find other apostemas in the throat or on those two ears, and cut them according to what I have said about the cutting of two veins equally."
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	"And I have already treated a woman with an apostema that was born in her throat, which had a dark color and little feeling, which had closed her throat, and the woman breathed with great difficulty, and it had been prohibited to her food and drink of water, and she had already reached death if there had not been for one day or two."
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	"And the apostema had grown so much that it had two branches that issued through two tubes."
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	"Therefore I made a hole through it and stayed in one of those tubes, and pulled out that one, and threw away the greater part of it, and then I cut off that which came from the other tube, and then I opened her mouth, and pressed her tongue, and then I stayed on that apostema."
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	"And then you cut off a large part of it, and there was no running out of it but a little blood."
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	"Absolutely it is the fault of that woman, and she began to drink water immediately, and also took food, therefore I did not cease to incise that abscess many times for a long time, and succeeded in removing an abscess from that place which had grown longer."
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	"Soon I took a scalpel and cauterized the ulcer of hers, therefore nothing else remained; and immediately she got up and did not know what God had done to her."
Capitol .xxxvii.	"Chapter .xxxvii."
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	"On the incision of a swelling when it is abscessed."
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	"When pus descends to the swelling, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the joint of the thigh, thick and round, then it is called a bubble."
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	"But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your cure does not help, and especially if an abscess has already been cauterized and is still remaining and becomes subtle, then it is necessary for you to incise that which is attached round; and if it is at that length, and it is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and it is not to its center, then it is necessary for you to tempt the incision of it, for there is fear about the illness."
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	"And when you cut it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, so that you make an end to the illness and press the tongue of it with an instrument which processes its form and immediately place the onion in the new one, and draw that downwards and incise it with one of the instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two melons."
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	"And it is necessary that you do not incise it except what is appropriate to the natural term without addition, for if you cut more of it, you will destroy its speech."
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	"And properly in the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and cure it until it is healed."
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"But if the illness was frightened by the incision of it, then it is necessary to use a cautery in the cauterization of it without fear, and the manner of the cautery on it is not except with sharp water, which you heat the head of the illness in its seat, and properly press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have said, and properly take of the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and bring with that live cause, and pause it neither thick nor subtle, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose form this is:"
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	"Be the extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is paused like the concavity of a spoonful of wheat, and pause the instrument with the medicine on the valve, and let the illness lie on its side so that saliva or spittle of the mouth of that does not fall through the internal medicine for some reason upon the throat of it and that it descends."
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	"And properly place your hand on the medicine, and express that upon the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see it become darkened and quiet by the biting of the medicine."
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	"And if you want to, take cotton and wrap it upon the extremity of the ray, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula above until the cotton adheres in that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and properly leave it for three or four days until it dries up and falls."
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	"And if you need to repeat the medicine, then do so, and properly after cauterization cleanse it around the uvula with cotton dipped in bode, and wash that which is on its circuit of the medicine with warm water, and cure it afterwards with an embrocation, and finally with gargarisms until it is healed."
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	"And this kind of treatment was saved for incision with much fear."
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	"Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cautery and incision, for it is cured by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabic cumin, camomile, broadleaf plantain, and similar herbs of that kind, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an earthenware pot, and let them be submerged with sour wine, and boil; and the pot should be well covered with decent clay, and there should be in the middle of the pot a tube upon which is paused a concave instrument of iron according to this manner; it may be made of silver or iron."
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	"And let the extremity of it be inserted into the mouth of the illness until the vapor reaches the uvula upon the uvula until the uvula is much obscured."
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	"And properly repeat this many times until it is dry, and make sure that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of an occurrence of aphthae, for it would too closely fit with the aphtha, and you should not do this, but rather declare the cure of the aphtha."
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	"But if this instrument is not at your present disposal, then take a reed and compose on its extremity a close of wool, so that the mouth of the illness may be covered, for the close of wool prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth."
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	"And this treatment is good for health."
Capitol .xxxviii.	"Chapter XXXVI."
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Removal of splinters and of that which adheres in the scrotum and other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Translation:
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Then it is necessary that you remove what appears to be a stone in the throat, upon which your gaze falls, because by pressing the tongue with an instrument beforehand, its nature will be declared.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach, because often the cause of obstruction is not forgotten through vomiting; or else give the patient a piece of napkin or lettuce leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of damp sea sponge, squeeze it well with a sieve and place that against the patient's throat, for when it reaches the place where its spines are extracted, they will then be forgotten.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you may also take an eel and beat it well with a sieve, and put it inside the table and suddenly pull it out; or else take a pot and suddenly put it in and suddenly take it out.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	And if these causes are not forgotten as we have said above, then you should use an instrument of lead made in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be thicker than a small reed, and at its extremity there should be a hollow cavity which you can insert into the patient's throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And let him raise his head upwards, and make sure that the instrument does not touch the patient's throat, lest it penetrate into the flesh with its point or spine, or else do this carefully with your own hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But nevertheless the patient should insert it himself, according to his own knowledge of the location of the cause and its surrounding area, and pull out his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity that has been prepared beforehand until the cause is forgotten.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of extracting blood attached to the throat
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When a leech is attached to the throat and it cannot be removed with medicines as we have said in the chapter on treatment with medicines, then consider this: examine the patient's throat under sunlight, since you have prepared an instrument made of bone which we have recommended for you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Then if you see the leech, remove it with a small hook or with gentle tweezers, carefully.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible for you to remove it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a hot iron pin inside the cavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and removed from the throat), and abstain from giving the patient any water for the rest of the day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then take a vein full of water that has been heated and press it on the patient's mouth, and wash his mouth with it; and do not swallow any of this water, but keep it in your mouth for an hour or so until the leech becomes numb from the heat.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not removed with this method that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with sulfur or with asafoetida using the instrument that we have recommended for fumigating the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so that it may fall off.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is another method of operation in fumigation: take an earthen pot in which there are burning coals and cover the pot with a lid in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the extremity of the instrument in that hole; then start fumigating from above; place the patient's mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape until you know that the smoke has reached the leech, for it will fall off immediately.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall off, then repeat the fumigation many times, and do not let the patient drink or eat salty foods or anything else, and do not give him any water until this treatment has been completed.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument with which one treats a leech in the throat when it is seen; and it resembles forceps as you can see, except that there may be some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is inserted into the throat and its extremity resembles the beak of an ibis, which is wide and rough like a file, so that when it grasps something, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this chapter is the sum of the sermon on the treatment of boils and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Boils are many species, of many kinds, according to their appearance, as they are mentioned in this book for each one.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their perforation and incision methods, of which there are two kinds: one for the specific type of boils; and for what is extracted from them by humectation.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second method is according to the parts of the body where they occur, for a boil on the head is treated differently from one on the buttocks, and a boil on fatty tissue is different from one at a joint, and each has its own treatment method.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And moreover, there are some boils that should not be perforated but rather await their maturity or completion.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Some boils should be removed when they are hard and not allowed to reach maturity or completion, such as those near joints, for when a boil is near a joint its substance extends until it can burst, and often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that limb; or it is near a main limb, and if you delay perforating it until it is matured it may harm the main limb; or it is near the buttocks, then perforate it even if it is not yet matured; do not perforate one that is hard and incompletely digested, but rather one that is near the buttocks, so that you do not cause prolapse of its contents and elongation into the inner parts of the buttocks, resulting in a fistula.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But know this: the time for perforating a boil is when it is matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Know that a boil is matured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and a reduction of redness and pulsation, and the head of the boil is sharp-pointed, and other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And know that perforation should be made in the location where the boil is purest and where the purulent matter comes out from the opening of the boil.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	Always perform perforation along the length of the flesh or skin if boils are located in the areas of the chest or belly, and in the location of ligaments, tendons, nerves, arteries, and in any other hidden locations where reflection is not possible; for those that are reflected upon, use perforation according to that limb.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the boil is in fatty tissue, it is better to let perforation happen after digestion is completed according to what has been said; for if you perforate it before that time, the flesh of its opening will be prolonged and much putrid matter will come out, and often the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it is increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some boils are perforated across the width of the flesh or skin due to necessity, or according to what that limb requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you should perform a small perforation for smaller boils and a large, wide one for larger ones or many sections depending on the variety of sizes of the boils.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are other boils in which the boil should be incised with curved forceps and cut when it has begun to appear, as happens with those that occur in mumps and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	"Of those that are situated in section having three angles; and of these is one in which it is inscribed thus like the figure of a mirror leaf, like the blisters of angles."
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	Of those where round section and crescent moon section are administered, similar to these.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one which is not like its superficial blisters of lions, you should pierce it with superficial or flat piercing alone.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the blister is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it and not worry about extracting all the matter at that hour; having extracted some of it, apply a poultice to the blister again the next day, and then extract a larger portion, doing this many times according to degrees until it is completely healed.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a weak constitution, or pregnant woman, or young child, or elderly in decay, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the exit of the pus, and quickly death may occur, so operate wisely.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore guard this chapter with great caution, and especially the piercing that you perform on these blisters, taking care to cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the blister is small or a flat section; then you should administer the remedies of lye or old cotton. And if the blister is large and the fissures of the piercing are many, then you should pause for some time until they heal together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the blister a portion of the skin is severed or concave at its circumference, then you should fill it with old cotton or thread made from linen cloth without moisture, just as when dressing wounds from cuts or scratches; strengthen that on the third day; and then proceed to treat it and heal it with whatever ointments are necessary until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then you should administer water and vinegar mixed with linen cloth, pressing it on the location of the bleeding several times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer remedies and treatment and powders which are recommended in many places throughout this book and its divisions.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is wintertime and the location of the blister is a place with many nerves, then you should wrap powders in warm wine and oil and press them on those locations.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the locations are fleshy, then you should press powders soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be done frequently until the third day, as we have said. Then you should dress the blister and cleanse it and administer to its cure whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the cure of blisters in general, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said how each type of blister should be cured individually, by chapters specifically.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XL.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the sectioning of blisters that occur on the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	On the neck of the child, small blisters appear and these are of the species of knots that contain tunics which are produced from them; and there are many species of them.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And among them are pimples, and those contain moisture resembling lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	"These are those that contain moisture resembling dust, similar to them; and those that are like stones, hard."
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	"And in the section of all [organs], and in the extraction of these, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause great harm."
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	"And the operation in section of these is that you spread them apart with an instrument whose shape appears like this, which is called 'entromes,' until you know what it contains."
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	"For if that which it contains is moisture, then cut it open lengthwise with a superficial section according to this shape:"
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	"And begin at the section of line B, ending at line G. Thus, when the moisture is evacuated, then you excoriate that which contains that moisture, leaving it without any cause whatsoever, because viewed troops return if there remains in it any cause."
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	"And immediately submerge it in Egyptian gum, if available, and if not, in water and salt; fill it with that and leave it there for another day, because with that you will corrode all that remains of that skin."
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	"And then iterate over that cut with Egyptian gum second and third times if necessary, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that skin; then cure the wound with gum until it is healed."
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	"If an abscess contains fatty nodules, then incise it according to this shape:"
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	"with a section having the form of a cross, and make an incision between both lips of the section and scrape it clean from all sides, and strive with all your strength to extract the tunic which contains that [abscess]."
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	"But if your arrow meets resistance, then do as I told you initially."
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	"And similarly do for the lapsed abscess in section and care according to what we have told you; and the incision on a lapsed abscess is easier, because it contains little blood and little moisture."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	"And sometimes some of these abscesses are in the head of some men with whom there is no humidity at all; which is because you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and it appears like deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be punctured, and if someone were struck by that, they would be harmed."
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	"But in other accidental abscesses on the head, except this one, it is not thus, such as those that occur on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears; but the incision for these altogether should be a superficial incision."
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	"And pause the perforation of those with thin walls because it is lower down, so that the body may be relieved of the pain in the lower parts."
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	"And then cure them with what is appropriate for that particular cure."
Capitol .xlii.	"Chapter XLVII."
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	"On the incision of scrofulas that occur in the neck."
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	"Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, shoulders, and armpits; sometimes they also occur in other parts of the body."
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And those that occur on the neck are many and are often generated between them; and all scrofula of these is inside its own tunic, like in knots and abscesses of the head, as we have mentioned."
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	"And there are many types of these scrofulas, for among them some are stone-like, others contain moisture, and still others are malicious which do not yield to treatment."
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	"Therefore in that one which you find to have good disposition upon examination, of which the color of what is revealed is similar to the color of flesh, and it is movable on all sides, and it is not attached to any nerves of the neck, nor veins, nor artery, and it is not hard, then incise it with a superficial incision from above to below the body from line G to line B., and scrape it clean from all parts, and extend the lips of the flesh with an incision or several incisions if you have need of them, like we said for abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little."
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	"And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves not be incised."
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	"And let the spatula not be too sharp lest your hand slip during the incision and cause harm, or that you incise something which it is not necessary to incise; for if you should incise a vein or artery and hinder yourself from your operation, then pause with the powder of vitriol triturated or other powders which stop bleeding, and compress the wound, and let it rest until the sharpness of the abscess abates and the inflammation subsides and begins to heal."
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	"When blood is let out."
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	"So return to your operation once the blood has ceased."
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	"And then inquire with the little finger if there are any other causes of the other small scrofulas; therefore incise them and clean them."
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	"And if it is near a large vein, then do not incise the scrofula at its root."
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	"Then bind it with folded cloth tightly and let it remain until it falls off by itself without harm."
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	"And then fill the wound with old wax which you have already melted in Egyptian oil, and then dress it."
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	"If you incise that entire scrofula, then it is necessary for you to approximate the two lips of the wound and suture them immediately, so that there remains no surplus."
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	"But if you find that there remains surplus after the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary for you to extend the incision along its root and draw it out, and apply a suture and what is said."
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial incision here where it appears to you to be the point of maturation, and cease the incision from what is below the skin."
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	"And when administering an incision, be sure to cleanse it with ointment and bandages, so that what remains of the corruption is destroyed."
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	"And also when you see that the wound is already cleansed, then dress it with a healing ointment until it is healed."
Capitol .xliii.	"Chapter XLIII."
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	"Of the incision of the head of an accidental tumor inside the gullet."
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	"The ancients called this section 'the epiglottis,' and we have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it."
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	"And this is the inscription of their speech."
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	"But in men who suffer from quinsey, it is advisable to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis, because by doing so there would be damage to all the veins and major arteries of the throat."
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	"But in those who have tumors caused by cautery in the mouth or throat or ears, when the disease is not in the canal, it is advisable to perform an incision of the epiglottis to avoid the damage that can be caused by piercing."
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	"Therefore when we want to do this, we should incise the epiglottis on its left side with three circles of the epilothic circles or four with a small incision across its width in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that the incision is made in the cartilage and not in the cartilage itself. This location is convenient for an incision because it is devoid of flesh and its blood vessels are remote."
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	"And if the physician is fearful, then it is advisable to extend the thyroid cartilage of the throat with an awl, and afterwards cut through the cartilage until it reaches the canal, but avoid damaging any blood vessels if they are visible."
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	"And then incise the epiglottis according to what we have recommended, and it is indicated by the swelling that occurs there due to that which has come out from the disruption and by the absence of voice."
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	"Let the wound remain uncovered for a short time."
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the hour has come in which perforation is feared, apply two leaves of cabbage from the garden, and remove that alone which is the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then promptly administer medications to cause flesh to grow within so that it may be healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Al-Bukhāris said that the main point of this lecture is to explain that veins which some of these boils have already obstructed the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath has been cut off, and some want to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the boil for a little while, and thus save them from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And therefore command to leave the boil uncovered until the evil of the illness is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and then command thus to treat the boil, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And this is what I have seen with my own eyes: a servant took a knife and inserted it into his throat and incised a part of the pulmonary artery, and I was called to care for him, and I heard him moaning thus as the dead moan, and I uncovered the boil and drew out the blood which had issued from the boil little by little.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	And therefore I confess that he had not incised any vein or artery, and the wind issued from the boil, and I cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And do not blame the servant if he did not speak in his voice, but returned to his usual manner some days later.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Chapter XLIV: On incision for an abscess that occurs in the throat externally, which is called a throat hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess commonly called "throat hernia" is large according to the color of the body, and is common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	"And in nature it is not born to cure."
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	"And accidental heat comes in two ways: the first is like fat knots, and the second is like an aposteme which is made by the knotting of an artery; and there is fear in that."
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	"And iron should not be presumed to him unless it is requested."
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then you should examine that [the node], and if you find it similar to fat knots, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then cut it like nodes, and extract it with this: " (The rest of the sentence is incomplete.)
Capitol .xlv.	"Chapter XLIV."
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	"Of the sectioning of types of knots."
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	"And there are many types of knots, all of which I have already mentioned in the division."
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	"However, you should also explain the difference between a node and an exitura when there is doubt."
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	"Therefore you say that in an exitura there is heat and fever and intense pain until the ebullition of the superfluity is suppressed; and it is complete putrefaction which then causes the fever, pain, and heat to cease."
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	"But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains only a small amount of fluid which is in its proper place."
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	"It is according to the color of the body, and its beginning appears like a boil and grows thus as an empty vessel, larger or smaller, and there are two kinds: either they are fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of this moisture vary, as I have said in the division."
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"So then, when you come to the treatment of a boil, examine that person and ask him about its beginning with an instrument called 'intromes,' according to what the shape will be in the chapter which follows this one."
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	"And it is the method of inquiring about boils and all kinds of swellings, which is to take this instrument and insert it into the moist place that you find in the boil, turning your hands little by little until you know that the instrument has entered the channel."
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	"And finally, draw out your hand according to the measure of the size of the boil, and then remove the intromes and observe what has come out in its place."
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	"And if it is forgotten moisture that comes out, of whatever color it may be, then you shall cut it with a superficial section according to what I have said about other boils."
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	"But if there is no moisture from the trace of the intromes, then know that it is fat."
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	"And dry it with a section having the shape of a cross according to this form:"
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	"So that you may know how to do it, and suspend it with bandages, and tear out the channel from all parts easily, keeping the skin or sac, if possible, over it, and draw out that matter with the boil."
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	"But if it is broken during the operation and it is not possible to draw out that matter, many times you will find there, and then you shall draw it out bit by bit until nothing remains."
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	"For if something remains, little or much, the boil returns according to its usual manner."
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And if you see that some small part remains, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong caustic powders, cover it with a plaster for cauterizing boils, and treat it with the other treatment until it is healed."
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	"And if it is a large boil, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what you find there."
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	"But if the pulsatile vein appears on the contrary side, or non-pulsatile, then cover and dampen the place of cutting with threefold treacle that is vitriol and let it rest for two days or three until the wound clears up and the boiling of the blood calms down; and then return to cut what remains of the boil."
Capitol .xlvi.	"Chapter XLVI."
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	"Of the forms of instruments necessary for sectioning and piercing."
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	"Of these, some are large in form, others medium-sized, and still others small."
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	"This is the large intestine shape:"
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	"The medium-sized intestine shape is this:"
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	"The small intestine shape is this:"
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	"These are made of iron, of a fuller's earth, and of curved extremities, so that they can be inserted quickly into the openings."
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	"And these are the shapes of the instruments, and they are named albedo. One of them is called 'berid'."
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	"And there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and few."
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	"The shape of the large experiment is the form of a lyre:"
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	"The shape of the medium experiment, form of lyre:"
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	"The shape of the few experiment, form of lyre:"
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	"It is convenient that they are used for those openings and outlets and fistulas and buboes because among these there are those of the bones and other causes."
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	"And redounding ones, thick ones, lions-shaped ones, like large needles with which the sutures are sewn, and they are made of citrine brass or bronze or iron or silver. And the best ones are those made of citrine brass."
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	"And they are made of black lead experiments, which it is agreed that through them the fistulas should be opened in the concavity of which reflections are reflected, and they are reflected with their own weight along those reflections."
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	"And there are three kinds of them: some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of its lumen."
Forma del experient gran de plom:	"Shape of the large lead experiment:"
Forma del experient migier de plom:	"Shape of the medium lead experiment:"
Forma del experient petit de plom:	"Shape of the small lead experiment:"
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	"The shapes of the hooks are of many kinds, for some are simple ones with only one curvature, and there are three kinds of them: large, few, and medium."
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	"And they have hook-shaped ends, and there are three kinds of them."
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"Among those hooks, there are some with two curvatures, and there are three kinds of them:"
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	"And among them, there are some with three curvatures, and there are three kinds of them."
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	"And all these are necessary in their place."
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	"Shape of large simple hook, form of lyre:"
Forma de unci simple migier:	"Shape of medium simple hook:"
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	"Shape of small simple hook, form of lyre:"
Forma de unci orp gran:	"Form of large hooked hook:"
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	"Form of medium hooked hook, form of lyre:"
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	"Form of small hooked hook, form of lyre:"
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"Shape of large hook with two curvatures:"
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	"Shape of medium hook having two curvatures:"
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	"Form of small hook having two curvatures:"
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of large hook with three curvatures:"
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	"Shape of medium hook with three curvatures:"
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	"Form of small hook having three curvatures:"
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	"And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and boils are cut and scraped, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small."
Forma de scapel gran:	"Shape of large scalpel:"
Forma del scapel migier:	"Form of medium scalpel:"
Forma de scapel pauc:	"Form of small scalpel:"
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	"The extremities of those with which the section is made are sharp, and the others are not-sharp, nor paused in such a manner, but so that the fear of incising a vein or nerve may be avoided in the scraping of nodes, and so that the illness may be healed and tranquility obtained by the slight burning which occurs after the excoriation of the boil."
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	"And these are the shapes of spatulas, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small, as you see."
La forma de magda gran:	"The form of the large spatula:"
Forma de magda migier:	"Form of medium spatula:"
Forma de magda pauc:	"Form of small spatula:"
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	"They are made of iron and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made."
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	"And it has at its extremity a hole pierced with spatula hidden, and through that channel the parts inside and outside flow when you want them to, as you see."
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	"The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden among the said ones after the perforation of boils and do not cause harm, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small."
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	"And these are the forms of those:"
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	"The shapes of forceps with which the flow of blood is absorbed, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium, and small; forms of lyre:"
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	"They are made of citrus iron, round with some length, and are subtle."
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	"And it is necessary that these kinds of forceps be large, medium, and small for you, so that with those the flow of blood can be absorbed quickly in case of necessity, especially when medicine is not immediately available."
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	"However, do not use those for absorbing blood in all parts of the body, and use them only in fleshy places, such as the armpits of the arms and thighs, and the nipples and bellybutton and genitals, and similar moist fleshy areas."
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	"And sometimes those instruments are made of others small ones resembling little forceps according to this form: with which blood is absorbed when it is done by flebotomy or in case of incising a vein or artery."
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes they are made round according to this form:"
Capitol .xlvii.	"Chapter .xlvii."
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	"Of the care of the nipples of men, which resemble those of women."
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	"Sometimes the nipples of some men become swollen during deep sleep when they begin to get hairy, and around them the nipples become swollen and resemble those of women with pimples."
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And to that which you see above, it is necessary to incise those with a crescent-shaped section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then scrape all the hardness, and then fill the wound with an ointment-containing dressing, and then join the two lips of the dressing with suturing, and cure it until it is healed."
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the nipple leans towards the sides and becomes softened by its size like those of women, then it should be cut in two on its own side with two crescent-shaped sections, each contained within the other at the end of each section, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form: from line B to line G. And then scrape the cord which is between the two lips of the dressing, remove the pus, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary in the cure until it is healed."
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if you do not fulfill the incision of that which needs to be incised because of the agitation of the illness and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the dressing with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that until it has corroded what is rough, and then cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .xlviii.	"Chapter .xlviii."
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	"Of the perforation of boils that arise from the armpits."
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	"Those boils that arise from the armpits are of the kind called scrofulas, hard ones which contain a point that is to be extracted."
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	"And of those that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all that is in the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it until the next day."
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	"And then the cotton should be removed and the boil cured with an appropriate ointment for that purpose, until it is healed."
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	"And if an abscess of the joints or scrofula is present, then incise it as we have said in the section on engorged scrofulas."
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	"If the inflammation has spread so that there is putrefaction, then apply cautery according to what we have said earlier."
Capitol .xlix.	"Chapter XLIX."
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	"Regarding the incision of abscesses that occur due to heat or phlegm."
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	"When the heat is broken and the cord that is on top of it becomes solid, then many times an abscess occurs. The signs by which inflammation and abscess are known to be due to artery or vein are: for when an abscess is caused by heat, it is long and adheres to the chest; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a harsh sound."
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	"And that which is due to a vein extends towards the belly of the body."
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	"And regarding this abscess, it is an error, especially in those that are situated near the axillae, around the joints, in the neck, and in many other places of the body; and if it is large, then its cauterization with iron should be avoided. And likewise, those that are on the extremities or on the head."
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	"Furthermore, regarding that which occurs due to inflammation of the tissues caused by heat, it should be incised along its length. Then, carefully open the incision with hooks and expose the artery, freeing it from its sheaths."
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	"And then place an needle on that side and insert it so that it pierces through to the other side. Then tie the artery with double thread in two places: this is useful for the extraction of two arteries which are located at the temples."
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	"And then pierce the spot that is between two ligatures with a spatula until all of the blood within it has been expelled, and thus the abscess will be resolved."
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply a dressing that generates heat in order to keep the ligatures warm until they have fallen. And also dress it with appropriate remedies according to what is necessary until it is healed."
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	"And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then you should hold with your hand what is possible of the abscess with the incision. Then insert the needle on that side which you have held with your hand and make it penetrate. Then tie the abscess with a double thread so that you can extract it from the other side, and then ligate the abscess with two threads according to what I have told you in the section on the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread."
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	"But if you fear that the thread may break, then insert it with that needle along all of the abscess from its initial incision, and tie your threads in four places."
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	"And then dry the abscess in its middle part until it is completely drained. Then incise the excess of the incision, and leave what remains tied."
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then place over it a poultice which you have moistened in wine and oil. Then apply the dressing that is made with dough and appropriate remedies until it is healed."
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as an abscess can occur in an artery or vein, similarly an abscess can also occur in nerves when they are struck or due to excessive exertion.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it most often occurs in the locations of the extensor muscles or the heel, or in any location where joints are strained.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a serious abscess, resembling the color of other flesh, and it has its greatest disposition without fever. When it becomes very tense, there is a sensation of numbness, as if in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that occurs on the chest, but rather outside of it, and it extends to all parts without reaching the front or back parts.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, those that occur at the joints should not be covered with iron, for this would cause severe contraction.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But one that is on the head or forehead can be opened with a scalpel.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then you should press it with your fingers and incise it with scissors.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you should suspend it with a hook, scrape it out, and remove it. Then adjust the flap with sutures, and dress it until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 2
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Regarding the incision of an abscess that occurs in the belly
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	There are certain men who have seen in the bellies of those and other parts of their bodies, tumors that are called funguals due to their similarity with fungi. Their root is subtle but their head is large. Sometimes their lips are turned inward, and they are either small or greatly magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two tumors resembling fungi, with no difference between them, being small and white.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these tumors were inverted and split open, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I incised those tumors and removed one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure for their incision is this: first consider whether the illness is moist, and if the color of the tumor is white, moist, and has a subtle root. Then incise it with a broad scalpel, and have cauteries ready in the fire at hand, for many times much blood flows out during the section, and if blood comes out, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	But if the illness is pale and fearful, beware of incising with iron. Instead, take fresh lead wire and insert it into the tumor according to the manner we have described, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then adjust at the constriction of the lead wire; continue to insert lead until the tumor is completely absorbed and falls off without being touched.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the tumor has a large root, then its incision can cause fear and trembling, especially one that is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible to incise most of it and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And dress it until the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	But beware that you do not presume to incise a tumor that is of dark color, has little sensation, and is guarded well, for it is cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I remember this in connection with cancer.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Regarding the treatment of an umbilical hernia
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	An umbilical hernia is caused by many things: either by fissures of the skin that is over the belly, or from the tissue or bowel protruding through other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery, as has been mentioned before, or by constricted wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a fissure of the skin and protrusion of tissue, then the color of the abscess will be similar to that of the flesh, with little pain. It will appear in various places.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	But if it is due to a prolapse of the bowel, then its location will be as we have described above, with great variation in position. When you press on it with your fingers, it disappears but soon returns. There is much noise and pain with it, and it becomes greatly enlarged during bathing or vigorous activity.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then there will be little noise and it will not disappear when you press on it with your hand. It will neither be constricted nor enlarged.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	"When it's due to blood, then this abscess appears blackening."
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	"If it's due to flesh, then the abscess is severe, large and hard, and its amount varies."
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	"But if it's due to wind, then touching it feels like a lion."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	"And the operation is to consider now if the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood or veinous blood or wind, then you should be prohibited from treating it, because in this case there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about apostemes by artery and vein."
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	"And if the prominence of the navel is due to the bowel or tissue, then you should command the patient to lie on their back and stay stretched out. Then, mark around the entire navel with your finger and then command them to turn onto their hands and knees but still over their two hands, and then surround the navel's area marked with a broad spatula. Then extend the mass of the abscess upwards using a large hot poultice, and finally bind it around firmly with a bandage or cloth in the appropriate manner."
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	"And then heat the middle of the extended abscess over the bowel and insert your finger into that spot to seek out the bowel. And if you find it and hold it with your fingers, then gently extract it and push it back inside the abdomen."
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	"And if you have found the tissue, then take a pair of forceps and cut out its excess."
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	"But if it is against your artery or vein, then surround that area and return to your operation. Then take two needles and insert them into those two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in a cross-shaped manner, making sure they penetrate. And then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles."
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the location to close up naturally with the stretched skin falling back into place. Or cut it open when it has softened and become supple, and then dress it using whatever is appropriate for wounds until it heals."
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	"And if the prominence of the navel is due to fat or humidity, then you should incise the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or humidity that you find in it. Then dress it with whatever is appropriate and ensure that the location is consolidated."
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii
De curacio de cranc.	Of the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	"We have said, in the division of the species of crab and in what manner it is to be treated with medicines, and that its cure is hindered by iron lest it should become ulcerated; and we have spoken of a crab generated in the greater and lesser care of the treatment of it."
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	"The ancients said that sometimes crab is found in places where its eradication is possible, such as on the breasts or between the thighs, and they advised excising all of it, especially when it is beginning small."
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	"But when it is advanced and deep-seated, do not approach it, for you will not be able to heal that ulcer nor have I seen another like it."
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	"And the operation in that case is as follows: you should first relieve the pain and purge black bile occasionally, and then apply a poultice if there is a manifest swelling present."
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	"And prepare the patient for the operation, and apply a poultice in that location with caution, and prohibit cutting wounds which are not necessary; and also hollow out all parts with the chain saw with good precision so that no cause of the roots of the ulcer remains."
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	"And let the blood flow freely, and do not remove it too lightly; express the locations and wipe off all of the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument which is at your disposal among the instruments."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if it causes you difficulty to remove thick blood from a vein or artery incision, then cauterize that place until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed."
Capitol .liv.	"Chapter 52."
De curacio de ydropici.	"Of the care of dropsical persons."
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	"We have already discussed, in the section on the classification of dropsies of water, and the signs of each type, the treatment of it with medications."
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	"And that which is treated with iron is only the species of dropsy alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of catarrh nor to the species of sciatica, for this is fatal."
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	"And when you have treated this species of dropsy catarrh with medicines and it does not improve, then consider whether the patient has already obtained relief from their illness, or if it is another kind of dropsy, such as that which affects the lungs or intestines and similar ones. Then beware that you do not treat it with iron, for fear there is in this matter."
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	"But if you want to treat the disease of excessive virtue, and in it there is no other illness but dropsy alone, not childbirth nor old age, then the manner of performing the operation is that you raise the patient between your hands, and the servant presses their belly with his hand, expelling the water from its opening, and immediately takes a sharp-pointed spatula in this form:"
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	"It should be long with two pointed ends, like a spatula, but nevertheless it should have some shortness little by little, so that in the operation you do not go inside the bowel and harm it."
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	"And consider also if the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, for then you must cut along with the section through the navel by the quantity of three fingers' breadths at the openings below, on its right side over the pubic area."
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	"But if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers' breadth."
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	"And if the cause of it is from the spleen, then your section should be on its right side."
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	"And do not make your section over the side towards which you want to draw out the excess fluid, for fear that it might flow into that place."
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	"And immediately perforate with the instrument all the canal, and enter into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the canal and the siphon, and you shall draw out from it; if there is the quantity of a fingernail or even more."
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	"And immediately perforate the siphon within so that the spatula reaches the place desired, which is the place of water."
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And then draw it out and insert an instrument with this shape:"
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	"And it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or latten lion, at its lowest part there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its extremity is cut in the manner of a feather, like this:"
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	"And at its uppermost extremity there is an armilla (a small hole), because when the instrument reaches the water, then that water will immediately descend upon the instrument, so that it evacuates water into the middle ear in moderate quantity; for if you evacuate more than necessary at that hour, it may cause sudden death due to the resolution of its animal spirit or approach the fifth stage near death."
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	"But evacuate it according to its quantity, considering the strength of the patient, the symptoms of the disease, the virtue of the pulse and his condition."
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	"And then remove the instrument and retain the water which is kept by the canal that retains the hole made on the siphon which you were advised to perforate in this manner."
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	"And repeat the operation on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and draw out a small quantity of water; do this for several days with caution, making sure that not much water remains."
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	"But if you draw out too much water from the patient, then cure him with embalmment in hot sand, and rub him with a lot of salt in his bath, and expose him to the sun for a long time; and treat him with drying medicines until he is healed."
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	"And cauterize the stomach and spleen near where you drew out the water, according to what I have told you previously."
Capitol .lv.	"Chapter Lv."
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	"Of the treatment of children who are born withimperforate openings for urine."
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb with the head of the mixture not pierced (or drawn too tight or not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	So immediately after birth, cut it open with a sharp and very fine scalpel like this:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then sew it up with a thin lead needle and thread, and let it rest for three or four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, remove the bandage and then replace it.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If you don't use lead thread, it's possible that urine will not close this wound.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But the one whose bandage is drawn too tight should be treated with a lead needle, as we have said, for several days until it has widened.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in whom the bandage is not in its proper place should be treated by leading it back to its position. The cause of this is that some children are born with the end of the foreskin attached so that they cannot urinate properly until they lift the foreskin with their hand above the opening. This is not due to their birth, but rather because semen cannot reach the mother's womb correctly, and it is a serious illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of this operation is that the sick person should be placed on his back. Then grasp the head of the penis with your left hand and pull it out forcefully, and cut off the foreskin from the glans penis with a sharp scalpel, just like cutting a feather, taking care not to remove any skin. Thus the middle of the penis will resemble the head of the penis, and the bandage should fall into its proper place as needed.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful during your operation for hemorrhoids, as many times it happens that... And stop the bleeding with whatever you use to cut it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 56
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of the whitening of the foreskin on the glans penis, and of its roughness, blackness, and adherence to the glans penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This whitening often occurs on the penis and is a fleshy prominence.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	"Of those, one is malignant and another is not malignant."
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	"And the benign one, after suspending it with a fine hook and excising that part which was tainted, place your hand over it using the Egyptian method; then cure it by applying a fine bandage until it is healed."
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	"And if it happens to be malignant and of dark color, you should apply a caustic remedy next to the incision and its surroundings."
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	"But if it happens on the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised person, and one part of the inflammation is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the inflammation that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; afterwards, cure the outer one, because if you cure them together with the foreskin, it may become constricted."
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	"And if the same happens in the genitals and on the blackened foreskin and gangrene, then you should remove all that which is already necrotic and which threatens to decay or has already decayed; then apply a plaster made with honey, which is moistened with bran of millet flour ground three times and sifted."
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	"And apply this plaster together with another cure until it is healed."
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"But if there is a flow of blood, then apply cautery according to the following method:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	"because cautery is useful in two ways at once: it stops bleeding and prevents gangrene when it becomes corrupted."
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	"And if the head of the penis is eroded and completely destroyed in one hour, then you should insert a lead cannula into the meatus of the foreskin so that the urine flows through it."
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in one whose foreskin is intact, and over which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to gangrene or an abscess), you should excise with a blunt spatula until the adhesions are dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed from all parts."
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	"And if it is difficult to separate those parts meticulously, then you should excise with a sharp spatula some flesh from the head of the penis and foreskin, because this is why the foreskin, when thin, easily adheres lightly."
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	"And then separate the foreskin and the head of the penis using a thread made of silk, which has been soaked in warm water so that they do not adhere again."
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	"And then treat it with astringent wine until it is consolidated."
Capitol .lvii.	"Chapter LXVII."
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	"Of the purification of children and the treatment of what happens to them during circumcision."
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	"Circumcision is not a cure for continuity like other diseases: but since it is within our operation and willpower, and its purpose is specifically for children, it is necessary that we assign the best operation and easiest way to achieve health."
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	"So they say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they did not use it in their laws. But this is only because they had acquired it through experience, which is why I have found most skilled craftsmen and barbers using circumcision and purification with a razor and with torches; and they use liniment with chalk and make incisions with the nail."
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	"And I have already tested all these methods and did not find better purification with tweezers, liniment with chalk or purification with the nail, because many times it escapes the cord above, because the skin of the foreskin has two tunics, and the inner one remains, which is why another incision and safe pain are forced."
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	"And in the purification that is done with a scalpel and is digital, which is used by barbers, the incision of the tip of the male member is not secure, because it often goes inside the skin."
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	"But in the operation with a nail, you often cause bleeding and ruin your operation."
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	"And the skin of an infant is short by nature, and many times it appears in such a manner that it has no need for purification, as I have seen."
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	"But from the purification that is done with tweezers and liniment with chalk, I find it good through experience, because the tweezers are of proportional incision, because the sharpness that is above is as much as the sharpness that is below; therefore when you press your hand so proportionally with two sharpnesses, you cut according to a comparison in one time; and compression of chalk is made with a figure containing the skin of the whole foreskin, without any error."
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	"And the first manner of operation is that you should keep the child more comfortably if he is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not do anything except lay the chalk on his foreskin alone, and leave it there for another day."
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	"And therefore I advise in all this manner that is within your power to do so much as his understanding receives."
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	"And therefore I advise you to keep the child between your arms and prepare him well, without being afraid; and hide the tweezers in your hand or behind your ear, so that the child does not see them nor anyone else of the instruments."
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	"And therefore put your hand on the foreskin of him and blow on the skin, and pull that which has come out and cut off the head of the foreskin, and then purify it from whatever dirt has gathered in it."
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	"And therefore mark the place with chalk doubled, and then tie a little below it with the second liniment, and then take with your thumb and index finger the said place of the liniment behind with good retention, and cut between two liniments."
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And therefore raise the skin softly and remove the head of the foreskin; and then let the blood run out little by little, because it is better; and sprinkle powder on it and over the powder place a cloth in which is smeared mutton tallow known with rose oil recently good; and leave that there overnight; and cure it with medication until it is healed."
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	"The form of the tweezers for purification is as follows:"
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	"Let the outer blades be blunt and not cutting, and let the others be sharp, so that the nail does not come out, and let the length of both sharpnesses be as long as the length of two clenched fingers."
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	"But the error in purification is when you pull too much the intrinsic skin completely or cut off part of it with the incision."
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	"Therefore, you must extend that from your hand with your nail in front of the aposteme of the place and cut that according to equality."
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	"And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then remove it with tweezers and cut it."
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	"But if three days have passed and there is still something inflamed behind the foreskin, then you should leave it until the inflammation has calmed down and carefully scrape it off and cut it according to what you are prepared for."
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	"And guard against the head of the foreskin, because it will not be there."
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	"And therefore cure it with whatever ointment that consolidates the plague from the powders that we have recommended in the treatise of powders."
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	"And if it is cut from the skin according to measure and you follow the parts above, then there will be nothing missing."
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	"But also cure it with whatever we have said until it is healed."
Capitol .lviii.	"Chapter LVIII."
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	"On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder."
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	"Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obesity or by stone, or by dropsy or by coldness, and it is similar to those that we have said about the methods of treatment in the division."
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	"And if urine is not dissolved, and retention of it is due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over on their knees."
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	"And appropriately you place weights on that one's back and stretch out their belly from the point just above their buttocks downwards, and the patient strains their anus as much as possible."
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	"So at that time, the neck of the bladder is constricted and expulsion of the stone occurs in the parts behind, so that urine is released."
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	"And if it is not dissolved even with what we have said here, then the cause of the disease is violent, so that evacuation is necessary using an instrument called a syringe, which has this shape: it should be made of silver and polished like a reed quill, as thin as a feather's tip, about the length of a palm and a half, with a thin tube at its end."
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	"And the manner of irrigation of urine through that is as follows: take the doubled thread and tie it at its end with good binding; and insert the ends of the thread into the part behind the syringe, and cut off any excess thread with scissors, but then insert the thread into the tube with violence And appropriately you join the syringe with a border and albumen of a hen egg."
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	"And then make the patient lie on their side, insert the syringe into the bladder and the catheter with olive oil, oil of juniper berries, and warm water."
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	"And then carefully insert the syringe into the catheter until it reaches its root; and appropriately bend the catheter upwards at the point of the navel; and appropriately push the syringe through that; and appropriately push that until it reaches the bladder, and then centa the disease is reached to the empty cause, but if not done in this order, then do it according to the twisted path."
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	"And then gradually extend the thread with the catheter little by little, because urine sticks to the thread."
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	"And then remove that and make urine pass for cure, and use a syringe, do not cease doing this until the bladder is evacuated and the disease has been alleviated."
Capitol .lix.	Chapter LIX.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of irrigation of the bladder with chamomile and similar instruments which are suitable for that purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is ulceration or an abscess in the bladder, or blood clots in it, or it is obstructed by stones, and you want to instill waters and medicines into it, then it should be done with an instrument called a chamomile, which has this shape:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	but at its end it is blunt, so it is closed."
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that there are three tubes: two of one part, like this ☹.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning there is a concave place, in which water is pushed in, and it should be according to the quantity that it can hold, without addition, until when some cause is drawn from the humidities by it, it may be drawn out, and when it is expelled, with that it may be drawn out, and when it is expelled for a long time, as chamomile does in naval battles."
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore when you want to instill humidity into the bladder, insert the end of the chamomile into the humidity, and push water with that which is pushed up into the tubes above, because the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the chamomile."
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the chamomile into the catheter as we have recommended in the syringe; and then push the humidity with that which you push, because that humidity will reach the bladder quickly, and the disease will be relieved."
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the fine irrigation instrument with which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	A silver or brass instrument should be made, whose tip resembles a small feather, which is then inserted into the wound.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then take a bladder, place inside it the moisture you wish to crystallize in the bladder, and tie it firmly with two strong cords around its neck. Then heat that moisture over a fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the crystal into the penis
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	Then press your hand over the bladder with the stretched skin, making sure that patient feels that you are pressing on the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you cannot find the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; pierce that through its entire thickness; then insert fine thread through those holes, so that it may be rotated. Then attach the circle as it is attached to the funnel, because you place in that one what you want from the humidities, oils, and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then tie that onto the instrument and do it as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand on it until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter LX
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the Extraction of a Bladder Stone
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division of species the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and their signs.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that in some operations on stone, hand manipulation or incision is required.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which remains in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And thus we explain this with clear and concise exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore it is said that stones generated in the bladder mostly affect children. And among its signs are that urine which exits from the bladder resembles water in its fineness and appears cloudy; the pain feels like a sting, and many times it prevents urination, and at other times it flows freely; and with that there is often straining of the anus.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it would be easier to cure children of this condition while they are still young, before they reach fourteen years of age; but it is difficult to treat in the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But among the young, it is midway between these two extremes.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that person in whom the stone is large and its removal will be easier; but if it is small, it is difficult to treat.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, when we approach the treatment of this condition, it is first necessary to alleviate the pain using a catheter that extracts all the sediment that lies in its channels. For sometimes these channels prevent the expulsion of the stone during its investigation.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient on his back and have him lie down quietly, lifting his hips with pillows so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder or near it.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then prepare the catheter that you have selected and place it near the things necessary for this procedure, so that the bladder may be entirely filled declining towards its sides.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then wait until it is full and empty it completely.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in its place, then promptly make an incision above it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not feel it with your touch, then apply olive oil to your index finger and insert it into the anus of the child or middle finger in that of a full-grown person.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And wait for the stone to lie near your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	Then gradually bring it towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your finger and expel it through the sides outside where you have made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	Then command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend the thighs upwards with his right hand, while with his left hand he presses down on the cord that lies beneath them near the place where the incision is being made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then introduce a spatula made according to this design:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	"Make the incision between the patient's buttocks and genitals, not in the middle, leaning towards the left side; let the cut be on that stone (kidney) and your hand be in the anus, and make a transverse cut, so that the outside of the cut is wide and inside is narrow according to the amount the stone can possibly allow, no more, for otherwise you will crush the testicle which is behind the stone where the cut should be made."
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	"You must know that some stones have an acute angle or margin, which makes their extraction difficult because of this."
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	"That stone is like a glans (penis head), round and easily extracted."
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	"Therefore if it has acute angles or margins, adjust it in the slit."
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	"And if it is not easily extracted, then you must press down upon it gently and decently with your finger whose tip should be like a chisel with which you press down on the stone, without sliding off of it; or else you may insert one of those thin curved instruments into it."
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	"But if you cannot press down upon it, then widen the incision a bit; and if you see blood flowing out, cauterize that with burnt vitriol."
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	"But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you should insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut open upon it; and similarly push a little further onto it; and similarly proceed if there are many more stones."
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	"And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance would be to cut into it with a wide incision, for it happens to the sick one of two causes: either it remains there or else it becomes dissolved by the continuous distillation of urine, because that place is not entirely consolidated."
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	"But if you administer expulsion from within to push it outwards, or else use forceps within the fracture to extract that in pieces."
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	"So once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with poultices of aloe and dragon's blood, and cauterize it."
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	"And apply over that dressing soaked in olive oil and wine, or in rose oil and clean water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	"And similarly let the patient lie on his back for three days, and do not remove the ligature until the third day."
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	"And when it is removed, wash the place with warm water and much oil; and then treat it with delicate ointments and with ointment of diaphoretic powder until it is healed."
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	"But if inflammation and corrosion occur in the wound, becoming hard and eating away like if blood were frozen inside the bladder, and because of this urine is prohibited (and this is recognized by the exit of blood with urine), then therefore insert your little finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it provokes irritation of the bladder and its putrefaction."
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply whatever ointment is appropriate for this type of cure until it is healed."
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	"And be sure during all the time of the treatment to keep both sides warm and to apply the medications that are placed on the location."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra, and it cannot pass urine, then treat it with what I have recommended before to reach a section, for many times this cure has been accused of causing a section; and therefore take a filet of iron made like this:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	"of triangular shape at the end, sharp, placed in wood."
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	"And then take some flaxseed, and tie it with that around the urethra below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	"And then insert the iron into the urethra, perforating with ease until the filet reaches that stone."
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	"Revolve the drill gently in that small stone with your hand, and continue drilling until you have pierced through it on one side so that urine may be expelled."
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	"Then press your hand over what has been broken off from the stone at its exit point outside the tube, because that is constricted and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed."
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	"If this treatment does not suit you for any reason which prevents it from being done, then insert a catheter into the stone and another on top of the stone."
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	"Then cut the stone in that tube between two ligatures."
E aprop extratz aquela.	"Then extract it."
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	"And then untie the ligature and change the blood-soaked cloth, which is located in the wound."
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	"And it is not necessary to use a catheter in the stone unless to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other ligature on top is only used until the exit of the stone, because when that ligature is untied, the tube returns to its place and closes the wound."
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	"And that is why it is necessary when you have inserted the catheter above, to elevate the tube at its exit points so that it may return completely and close the wound as we have said."
Capitol .lxi.	"Chapter LXI."
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	"On the Extraction of Stones from Women."
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	"Stones are rarely produced in women."
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	"But if a stone is found in one of those, its treatment is difficult and prohibited by many reasons."
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	"One reason for this is because women are ashamed to show their private parts."
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	"And the second reason is that it's difficult to find a woman who knows how to examine herself and report to her doctor whether she's a virgin or has been married."
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	"The third reason is because there are few women skilled in this art, particularly the operation of lithotomy with a knife."
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	"And the fourth reason is that the location of the incision for a stone in women is far from the location of the stone itself, requiring an extensive incision which can cause fear."
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	"But if necessity requires it, then you must take a midwife who is well-skilled and not easily embarrassed."
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	"But if you are unable to find such a midwife, then look for an experienced and skillful doctor who can present himself discreetly, or bring in a respectable woman knowledgeable about women's matters, or a woman who has some experience in this art."
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	"So bring her in and command her to do everything that you order, starting with the examination of the stone. First, she should examine whether the woman is a virgin, for which she must insert her finger into the vagina and feel for the stone."
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	"So if she finds it, have her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make an incision over that spot."
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	"But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine for the stone, placing her left hand on the bladder and pressing firmly with good compression."
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	"So if she finds it, then gradually move her finger from the opening of the bladder to the sides with great caution and strength until you reach the root of the matter."
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	"And then make the incision over that position of the opening of the vagina where you feel the stone stuck on either side of it, keeping your finger close to the stone without removing it."
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	"And make the incision small at first. Then insert the hook into that incision and feel for the stone. If you find it, adjust the incision according to its size so that you know how much of the stone will be expelled from there."
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	"And note that stones have many shapes: some are small and large, round and jagged, long and round, or branching."
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	"So you should know what type of stone it is based on what you feel about its shape."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	"And if you see blood flowing, adjust the location of the incision with a cauterizing iron and leave it for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your operation until the stone is expelled."
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	"And make sure you have prepared all the instruments mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation."
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	"And if you see blood flowing and know that it is coming from the incision in the artery, then place powder on the location and apply pressure with a tightly-wrapped cloth and strict compression. Do not repeat this action, and leave the stone alone without extracting it, for it will cause great harm to the patient."
E aprop cura la plagua.	"And then dress the wound."
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	"So when the bleeding has ceased some days later and the location has healed, then return to your operation until the stone is expelled."
Capitol lxii.	Chapter LXIII.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision for incarcerated hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A strangulated hernia is nothing but an aggregation of moisture in the white membrane which is left behind by the descent of the intestines containing the hernial sac, and it is called a "white membrane."
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And sometimes it is in the proper integument which nature has prepared in the area of the hernial sac, where it was once another hernia; and this is the cord of the intestine between the white membrane which we have mentioned, but this is nothing but fat.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The cause of this hernia is weakness of the intestines, which occurs when this matter flows out from them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow received on the abdomen.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many colors: it may be yellowish or reddish, red, blackish, or a milky white color. This last is the most common.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is located are these: if it is in the white membrane which we have mentioned, then the abscess will be round and slightly elongated like an egg shape, and the intestine will appear because the moisture contains it on all sides.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the proper integument, then the abscess will be round with a depression like an egg, and because of this it is believed to be another hernia.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the cord of the intestine and the white membrane, then the patient will complain of pain.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then express the color of the moisture in the abscess with an incision made beforehand; and according to what is expressed in the tracks of the incision, judge what is beneath it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this with an iron, it is necessary that we order the patient to lie on his back if possible, and let him raise his body up.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then have him lie on his back over some high cause or a little above it, placing many blankets beneath him.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then sit on the left side of the patient and order the assistant to stand on his right side. The assistant should extend his arm towards one or both sides of the cord of the intestines and the navel area of the abdomen.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad spatula and cut the cord of the intestines lengthwise in the middle, close to the pubis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make the incision with great care along this line, far enough from the skin of the intestines so that it reaches the white membrane enclosing them.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excise that, and observe, and take care not to incise it; and the excision you make should be done gently so that nothing is suspended with the egg membrane, and explore as much as possible with the excision according to its quantity.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	"Then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide perforation, and remove all the water."
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	"Then separate between two lips of the section with forceps and stretch the bladder at its sides; and do not touch the cord that encompasses the genitals, and cut open the bladder in that manner that is possible for you."
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	"And cut it open with its entirety or in pieces and especially its thin side, for if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, there is not much certainty that the water will not return."
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	"Moreover if you proceed that way from outside its cord during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the bladder, water will return inside it, and therefore adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suture, and then take care of it as you would other wounds until it is healed."
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	"And if you find the bladder corrupted by another illness, then you must tie the vessels that are close to it and remove the bladder, and then take care of it with what we have said."
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	"But if water is accumulated in two separate places at the same time, then you should know that there are two hernias. Therefore cut open that part according to what you have done with the other hernia equally; and if it appears to be an operation, then perform it."
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	"And also you should clean the blood, and then put into the incisions wool immersed in oil or rose oil; and pause outside with other wool which you have immersed in wine and oil, and expand that over the genitals and navel of the belly; and put upon it doubled cloths and powders, and bind those over with linen according to this form:"
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	"And also two cloths should be taken and filled with wool carded in this manner; and their ends should be made with cotton or wet wool, and they should be tightened with a strap to the breeches of the breeches, and one of the ends should take from the buttock within the two, and the second should take at the parting of the thigh, and two other ends should go over the left and right knees, and two other ends over the ankles, and all the straps should be adjusted in the breeches of the breeches."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	"And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with caustic instead of sectioning it with iron; and you should take a subtle cautery knife and cut into the cord of the genitals with it, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white cicatrix containing water is revealed, and then you should take caustic in this form:"
e es asemblat a letra greca.	"And it resembles the Greek letter Gamma."
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	"And also perforate that cicatrix with it, and ignite until all the moisture has been expelled."
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	"And also stretch the cicatrix with forceps and scrape it with forceps and scrape it with an ignited subtle cautery; and cut into that according to what is possible for you until you have removed all of it, and guard yourself from hot water so that fire does not touch it."
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	"And know that this operation is safer and farther from bleeding than an operation by section."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	"But if you encounter an aposteme during the time of sectioning or cauterizing, or bleeding, then you should take care for what is causing it to you according to the cure that is appropriate for it, as has been said."
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	"But if the patient is afraid and does not await a second operation due to its horror, then perform perforation according to what you recommend for it; and this is when you are certain, by that which we have said about meanings, that that hernia is watery."
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	"Therefore you should make the patient sit on some elevated cushion, and then perforate the aposteme at its lowest part with a broad spatula, and continue the perforation along the length of the body."
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	"And let the aperture be wide until all the water has flowed out."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	"And also pause upon that place and close it with cotton and leave it there, so that the remaining water may flow out."
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	"And then treat it until the wound is healed."
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	"But if there is difficulty in the outflow of water at that time, then perforate it: and this happens only because the white panniculus in the opening of the wound causes difficulty and hinders the exit of water. Therefore you should put into the wound a needle or instrument with which water can be drawn out from dropsies, the form of which is described above; or adjust to the opening of the wound a small tube."
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	"And know that the water returns and increases again about six months or around those times. And when it has increased, then perforate according to that same method, for the patient will thus pass their days."
Capitol .lxiii.	"Chapter LXIII."
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	"Of sectioning a fatty hernia and its cure."
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	"I know that in this section about hernias, there is great danger of losing the patient due to complications in major cases. For this reason, it is my opinion that he should be dismissed and saved by another means."
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	"Do you remember the operation we performed on that one and the specifics of the abscesses?"
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	"Therefore, I say that abscesses are born in the bodies of those who are pregnant and this happens for many causes: either by acute acid surplus, which is poured into the genitals, or by percussion."
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	"And the color of the abscess follows the color of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a serious abscess."
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	"And a large white abscess is one that has been calcified, whose color is dark, and it is not felt internally."
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	"And sometimes this happens due to the nodulation of the arteries, and by inflammation of those vessels as already perceived in its recall, or by inflammation of veins."
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	"But what happens due to the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched."
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	"But what happens due to inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by pressing it with the fingers."
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	"And it is possible that an incision may have been made on this type of flesh and on other kinds of flesh; and it is done by inserting the knife into the genitals, and extending the hand up to its parts, extracting the white abscess, releasing the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tying them, and cutting the suspensory ligament so that you release it from all attachment of the parts of the testicles."
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	"Therefore, if the testicle is already attached to those flesh adhesions, then it is necessary for you to extract the testicle and cut away that adhesion."
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	"And if there is an adhesion within some cause of the abscess, or between what is between the vessels, then it is necessary for you to release all that adhesion and cut it away with a rounded incision."
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if there is a growth of flesh in the place where that adhesion is located behind it, then it is necessary for you to cut away all of that and extract the testicle as we have said."
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"Therefore, once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine; and soon afterwards cure it with another cure until it is healed."
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernias that are caused by wind.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Wind hernia is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bubble with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult physical exercise and walking on the sick person.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, fear is the cause that precedes memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	"However, what we call operation in that according to what they did first."
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	"I say that you should place the patient on an elevated chair; and appropriately, expose the suspensiony ligaments of the testicles at their roots; and also grasp the spermatic cord with your fingers as it exits from the scrotum; and hold those other helpers who are with you, and extend them with great force."
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	"And now, incise with a sharp scalpel along the scrotum transversely on the right side of where the vessels are visible."
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	"And then carefully cut away all the skin in this manner as we have said for extraction of the hernia, which is on the temples."
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	"And then take a needle with doubled thread, and insert it at the first location where you noticed the opening, and insert it again at the last of those locations."
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	"And then incise that in the middle location with a straight cut along the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humors."
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	"And then heal the wound with the same care as for other wounds, so that the vessels which you did not tie off do not cause any harm."
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	"But if you find that all the vessels are tied off, then it is necessary to either extract the testicles or tie them off with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels. And then they should be removed, so that there is no harm from them."
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter LXV
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	**On the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.**
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	"Hernias occur due to a rupture that happens in the ciphac [ possibly referring to the diaphragm], stretched out over the abdomen on the side of the navel, causing some intestines to protrude through that opening."
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	"This rupture occurs either in the diaphragm or as a result of an incision made there. It can happen due to various causes such as percussion (blow), sneezing, coughing, heavy lifting, or severe exertion."
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	"And when it's due to an extension of the diaphragm, it happens gradually over time and not suddenly. It also tends to form an abscess between the chest and the abdomen because the diaphragm presses on the intestines."
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	"And when it's due to a rupture of the diaphragm, sharp sudden pain occurs initially. An abscess forms on either side of the spine near the chest wall, caused by the contents of the intestines herniating through the hole in the diaphragm."
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	"Sometimes, a portion of the intestine gets stuck outside the abdominal wall, and this type of hernia is called an 'incarcerated' or 'strangulated' hernia."
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	"Sometimes it causes bloating and discomfort, sometimes the intestines slip back into the abdomen through the opening in the diaphragm, where they can become trapped, causing significant pain, especially when pressed."
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	"And in the treatment of these conditions with iron, care must be taken to avoid damaging or cauterizing the tissues there."
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	"The manner of operating on this condition is as follows: first, the patient should be made to reduce their abdomen by pressing inward with both hands at the sides of their convexity. Then, place your hand on their chest and elevate their arms upwards."
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	"Then, grasp the spermatic cord where it passes over the pubis, and incise it throughout its length. Then, use forceps to hold open the two lips of the incision as needed."
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	"And if the incision is made long enough, then that portion of the hernia can be pushed back through it."
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	"Then, carefully excise any sac surrounding the herniated portions of the intestines until the white, glistening peritoneum of each side is exposed."
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	"Then, insert your finger between the white peritoneum and the hernial sac which is behind the testicle, carefully separating them from each other."
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	"Then, grasp the spermatic cord at its external portion with your left hand, and extend the white peritoneum upwards with your right hand, elevating the hernia along with it through the incision. Then, command the assistant to extend the hernia further upwards, while you dissolve any adhesions present behind using saline solution."
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	"And then check with your fingers that there is no bowel wrapped around in the white peritoneum."
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	"But if you find any cause, then immediately reduce it back into the abdomen."
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	"Then, take a needle with a large eye and thread it through the last fold of the hernial sac, which is below the spermatic cord where the incision was made. Then, cut off the ends of the threads that are protruding from the eye, leaving about four threads. Then, tie some of them together in the manner of a knot. Finally, tie this ligature tightly around the hernial sac that we mentioned earlier, which is below the spermatic cord."
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	"Then, tie the ends of the threads together and tie them tightly around the ligature, ensuring that none of the vessels that pass through it can cause any inflammation or infection as a result."
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	"And tie another ligature next to the first one, about three fingerbreadths away from it. Then, cut off all the remaining hernial sac that is below the spermatic cord at a rounded edge, leaving behind only the hernia."
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	"Then, make an incision below the spermatic cord to allow for the free flow of blood and pus, as we have previously recommended."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	"Then, apply lanolin soaked in oil to the wound and dress it; also apply the ligature that we have recommended (and occasionally cauterize the white peritoneum around the incision to prevent bleeding, as often happens). Then, leave the ligature in place to fall on its own."
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	"But if there is excessive bleeding, then hot water should be poured onto it and pressure applied until the bleeding stops as we have said."
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"And then treat the wound with the usual care for wounds until it heals."
Capitol .lxvi.	"Chapter 66."
De hernia ventosa.	"Of Ventous Hernia."
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	"In this hernia, there does not appear to be one that has been burned during its treatment with iron."
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	"And the first [servant] said that it was done as we had recommended in the hernia which is with pus: that you lie the vessels close to the section over that with facility of it; and close in the middle place around the aposteme with water that works that, until the vessels fall."
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	"And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed."
Capitol .lxvii.	"Chapter 67."
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	"Of the dissection that is done in hernias."
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	"Sometimes there happens rupture in hernias as we have said, and it becomes inflamed."
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	"And they do not give the cause of the bowels to the physician; and if they do give [it], that is little; and it returns again in all hours."
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	"But if the time is prolonged with that, there is made an adjusted fissure in the scrotum until the bowel goes into the scrotum; and this happens because of the extension of the scrotum which is in the hernia as we have said, which causes the scrotum to be stretched out, and around it becomes softened and the place becomes apostematized and inflamed."
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	"And the cure of that is with cauterization as has been preceded by its narration."
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	"And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and that is that the patient lies on his back between two tables, and around the place of rupture of inflamed apostemes, it is dried by section across according to three fingers."
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	"And then strengthen the scrotum white which is under the cord until it becomes visible."
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	"And then take a rake and press that upon the prominent place of the scrotum, and press that on the front of the abdomen."
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	"And then cut the two prominent places over the extremity of the scrotum's rake, and join them together with a suture one to the other."
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	"And then extract the extremity of the rake, and do not put back the scrotum entirely, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause as you wish to know in the cure of intestinal hernia."
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	"And then cure that with the cure of wounds, and when you incise the skin, clean it and restore the wound until it is consolidated; for the scrotum is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted."
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	"And cauterization is better in this place, for it is closer to health."
Capitol .lxviii.	"Chapter 68."
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	"Regarding the softening of the spermatic cord."
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Frequently in some men, the spermatic cord becomes softened because the flesh that is between it becomes softened, and this can be felt through touch.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the person treating him to make the patient lie on his back and cut away all the softened spermatic cord that is over the natural one; and then approximate both lips with a suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, at the beginning, remove the excess softened spermatic cord with three or four stitches and close it tightly with a suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then, cut between the sutures; and then treat for other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Capitol .lxix.	"Chapter 69."
De castracio.	"Regarding castration."
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is forbidden by our law, but it is necessary to mention this in this book for two reasons: the first being that it falls within the knowledge of the physician when he is consulted about it, so that he may know how to treat him who suffers from it; and the second reason is that often we have had need of castration of other beasts for our own benefit because of those animals, such as horses, goats, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting through the division [of the spermatic cord].
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by crushing, the procedure is as follows: make the beast lie down on its back with its hindquarters immersed in water until the genitals are softened and limp and hanging down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take them with your hand so that they may be resolved and not appear detached from their touching [i.e., without pulling too hard].
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration performed by cutting and dividing, you should hold the beast down and press the spermatic cord of its testes with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then ligate the suspensiony ligament, and cut above each one with a single section so that two pieces result.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut off those which you have castrated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	Do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum, but remove the delicate scrotum which is over the testicles.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this manner of castration is better done by crushing because crushing leaves no cause of the testes so that the beast desires copulation.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then dress the wound so that it may heal properly.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter LXX
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when something appears that fills the space of the spermatic cord between two testes, resembling a vulva in form in which there are no testes.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes from it urine flows which is in the spermatic cord of the testes.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women there is only one kind: it is that the vulva above the pubis appears like two testes of a man, somewhat diminished at its opening just as in men's pudenda and two testes.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds for men and one kind for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you cut away those adhered tissues so that the emission of fluid from that may cease, and then dress them with treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men's hermaphroditism where urine flows from what is in the spermatic cord of the testes, there is neither treatment nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On lentigo and flesh raised by causes of women
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	A true lentigo is firmly attached to natural causes which are roughened and appears flat with regular growth, but sometimes it is enlarged in some women to the point that it becomes spread out like that in men and may interfere with copulation.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore you should grasp the excess of lentigo with your hand or with a poultice and cut it off.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	But do not finish cutting too deeply, especially in front of the anus, lest bleeding occur.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then dress it with treatment for wounds so that it may heal properly.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But flesh raised is flesh that grows in the pubic region until it fills up there, and truly resembles a tail (and for this reason some first called it "tail disease"); therefore we should cut it away just as we cut off lentigo, and dress it so that it may heal properly.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hemorrhoids are when the vulva is not perforated or has a small opening.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it may be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental hemorrhoids occur due to a preceding illness and are caused by either adherent flesh, delicate scrotum, or thick skin.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And they occur either in front of the pubis or on the sides of it, or above it, or below it. They prohibit copulation and conception and childbirth, and truly prohibit menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The diagnosis of hemorrhoids is made by examining the vulva: if prolapse is apparent, it should be reduced; but if not apparent, you should search for them with your fingers or with a speculum.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if prolapse is due to delicate scrotum and it has prolapsed between the two labia majora, then cut away that scrotum.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And if it is suspended between the two labia minora, then suspend your fingers from both sides of its edges.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And let the woman lie on her back with her buttocks raised, and then spread apart the two labia majora with force so that delicate scrotum may break open and prolapse be reduced.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool soaked in oil and place it on that area, and cover it with a bandage for one day so that the wound may not be consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the scrotum is thick and tough, then cut it away with a broad spatula or with myrtle leaves.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if prolapse occurs due to flesh, then suspend that with a poultice and cut it away.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the medicines which stop bleeding without bites, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and frankincense mixed with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then insert a wide lead cannula so that the wound may not heal too lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	Hold it for several days and apply hot water compresses.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then dress it with other wound-healing treatments until healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	Sometimes it happens that other flesh is born from the natural vulva, and then cut it away in this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this occurs due to a hard abscess in the vulva, then do not cut the hard abscess with any iron instrument.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	"Treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red buttocks that occur in the cunt of women."
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	"Hemorrhoids are caused by the inflammation of many veins around that area, which constantly bleed; and when these hemorrhoids are old and hardened, they become piles."
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	"And as you have said in the division of species and their signs, I will say which of these receive treatment and which do not."
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	"Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are in the front of the anus and not apparent to the touch, at that time there is no need for cure with iron."
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	"But those which are in the opening of the anus and can be felt, are those which require treatment."
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	"And you must put the woman in a warm bath and then extend her buttocks with forceps or rough cloth, and incise those with razors."
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	"And then powder should be sprinkled over them where the blood flows from one of the incisive powders without biting, such as acacia and similar things."
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	"And then she should lie on her stomach for an hour, and then pause that in warm water."
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	"And if the bleeding of blood persists, then let her be seared in a decoction of sumach and of cork oak acorns and of millet grains and of similar things."
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	"And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with that over her back."
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	"And if the blood is cut off, then it is good; but if not, then let it adhere with two leeches and let the nipples be scarified without cutting."
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"And then take wool and immerse it in juice of cilantro or juice of hyssop or juice of rue with repent wine, and let it adhere to the place, and also cure the place with lint until it is healed."
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	"But if the person is of rough behavior, then you must incise that which appears to you of what I have said in that same manner."
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And cure it until it is healed."
Capitol .lxxiv.	"Chapter seventy-four."
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	"Of accidental perforation of the bladder."
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	"Many kinds of tumors accidentally occurring in the bladder, such as cancer and tumors that ulcerate and adhere and infiltrate and fester and form fistulas that bleed and secrete pus and bile and other tumors."
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	"And I have already spoken of these diseases and their kinds and their symptoms and the treatments for them in the division [of medicine]."
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	"Now I want to discuss in this treatise the cauterization that is done on the bladder when it comes to those tumors that are thought to be incurable, and if you want to know how the operation of it is performed with iron."
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	"So then you should consider whether the pain of the tumor at its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if cats sit on it does it hurt, and therefore do not perform an operation for it until it has ripened enough so that the sharpness of the symptoms ceases."
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	"And then you should make the woman lie on her back with two pillows under her head; she should recline on her shoulders and adjust her weight to where the tumor is pushing out below the belly, and let her knees be spread apart, and pause her hands away from her thighs, and tie each one with a bandage convenient for water."
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	"And then the midwife should follow on the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the bladder is made, the form of which will be shown in those causes that will follow."
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	"And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you should place yourself at the right of the woman's groin, and only the part of the instrument that enters the bladder should be inside it, and lead the sick person."
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	"But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the bladder, then it is necessary that you should place poultices on the tissues around the opening of the bladder so that the entry of any instrument into the opening of the bladder is prohibited."
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	"And it is necessary that you should place the point that runs in the instrument on the right side and above, and that the person who administers it holds the instrument and turns the point until the opening of the bladder is opened."
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	"And when the outlet appears, and it is touched with the hand and it is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you should dry it with a wide spatula."
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	"And when the urine is evacuated, then it is necessary that you should place in the wound a gauze soaked in rose oil or green oil in which there is some astringent; and press the catheter on the section in the opening of the bladder."
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	"And then cover the bladder with clean cotton wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled."
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	"And let it be cared for properly for two days, anointing it with that ointment convenient for this until it is healed."
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	"And sometimes the bladder and the wound are washed with rose water and honey, and also with water in which either red roses or long-stemmed lilies have been boiled; and then it returns to being anointed."
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	"And if the wound is inside the bladder and it has been wounded, then it is necessary that you should prohibit its cure with iron; having care of it with what we have said in this division."
Capitol .lxxv.	"Chapter LXXV."
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	"Chapter LXXV To teach midwives how to treat women who give birth according to an unnatural figure."
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	"Natural childbirth is necessary for the midwife to recognize at the start through signs of it. When you see a woman pressing her thighs apart and wishing to smell the air, and she is comforted by what is upon her during labor, and she hastens the exit of the infant, then you know that this birth follows the natural figure, and the second one hangs with its mouth or suspended or pendent from the navel."
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	"Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the belly of it [the infant] be compressed so that the embryo descends gently, and when it has descended upon its head, then let the second one come out, and may it be cleansed of those superfluities with good cleansing."
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	"But that which is another than this birth is unnatural and blameworthy; for when the embryo has exited upon its feet and the body of it has come out before the head of it and its feet, and one hand of it, or one foot of it, or the head of it and one hand of it, has come out, and then the rest of it is turned over onto its neck, this resembles those figures that are blameworthy."
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all of these causes, and that she guard against error and deception."
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	"And I have shown you the entire figure of those [birth positions], and what kind is in them so that it may be understood by this and it was placed upon this."
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	"When the head has exited upon its head by natural effort and it is vehement against the woman, and this birth is difficult for her and her strength has already been depleted, then let them make that plaster or whatever women have, and evaporate with hot water mixed with fenugreek seed and humid oil."
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	"And then let the midwife insert her hand between its buttocks, which are small and divided, and remove with that the second one or cut it with her nail within what is in her of humidity."
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	"Then press upon the woman's belly until the child descends."
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	"But if it does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be anointed with powder of mastic and powder of fenugreek mixed with cumin."
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	"Then command her to be pressed, or anointed, and make her sneeze with incense; and hold her mouth and nostrils closed for one hour, because the child will soon be forgotten."
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	"And if both of the child's shoulders have been forgotten at the beginning, then it is necessary for you to bring them out little by little with gentleness."
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	"But if it does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet up, and then strike the cushion upon the ground; and let the woman be held so that she does not fall due to the shock."
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	"And if the shoulders are not easily turned and the child is dead, then cut them and extract the remainder of the child or tie the cord to its hand with cloth and extract it gently, because that one will be forgotten."
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	"Of the emergence of the embryo upon its feet."
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	"When the child emerges upon its feet, then it is necessary for you to push those down and turn the child gently, and also scrape that with your nail, and also take one of its feet and extend it little by little."
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	"But when it is within the thighs, then command it to be pressed and make it sneeze with incense, because it will soon be forgotten if God wills."
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	"And if it is not forgotten with what we have described, then return the child little by little until you place it according to its natural figure, because it will soon be forgotten with gentle emergence."
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	"And if it is prohibited with everything that we have described, then take mastic powder and dissolved gum, grind them together well in the mortar, and then line with that the woman's mouth and the lower part of her belly."
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	"And then make her drink hot water until she sweats from the hypochondria."
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	"And when sometimes the parts of childbirth are inflamed, then make her inhale steam from myrtle and apply poultices to her."
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	"And when she has inhaled steam for one hour, then make her sit upon a cushion, and also make her sneeze and clear her mouth, and lift her up, and press the lower part of her belly gently, because the child will soon be forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	"Emergence of the child upon its back and shoulders."
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	"When the child emerges in this manner, then gently insert your fingers between its shoulders little by little; and also have the woman lie upon her back with her feet hanging down, and let those shoulders rest on the bedding, and bring them together."
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	"And then press upon its belly little by little, and also extract what is between its legs from the ears downward until it is prepared for the lower part."
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	"And if the child is not forgotten, then take its feet and shake them with violent motion, and also press that which is on the hypochondria gently until the child pushes towards the upper parts."
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	"And then insert its shoulders and scrape the child little by little, and command the woman to press until the child is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	"Emergence of the child laterally while one of its shoulders is pendant."
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	"It should be gently reduced by the hand of the midwife, but if you cannot reduce it, then raise the woman and make her walk."
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	"And if she cannot walk, then have her lie upon the bed and strike its buttocks with violent blows, and also administer remedies which you know and have described of mucilages."
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	"And if the childbirth has come, then make her sit upon a cushion, and study upon the reduction by hand, and scrape the child according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to press herself until it is forgotten."
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	"Emergence of the child upon the nape of its neck with its shoulders spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back."
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	"It is necessary for the midwife to have her hand on the child's head and also turn it little by little, and bring it out with ease."
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	"And when that is done and when it has been scraped, then place upon its head what we have described of oil and mucilages."
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	"And then command her to rub it little by little, and when you have done that, then make her sit upon a cushion and command her to lean towards the right side, and also command her to press herself, and make her sneeze with incense."
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	"Emergence of the prepared fetus upon one side."
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	"When there is horrible emission from the mother according to this manner, consider it, and then make an incision with your nail into the second one until it is evacuated of moisture."
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	"And if the child is suspended upon its face and nape of the neck, then make an incision into the belly to prevent it from being retained and dying."
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	"And then push the child towards its parts inside until you place it according to what is necessary, and command the woman to press herself several times, and it will be forgotten with light emergence if God wills it."
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	"Emergence of twins or multiple fetuses."
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	"Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and strange, though it happens by nature's decree."
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"And count those [ovaries], whether they be multiplied or not, and separate them by cyphac, distinguish each one within the ligament in the navel of each."
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	"And if some of them are difficult to remove at childbirth and arrive at what we have said about the unnatural shapes, then you take care of those as we have recounted."
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	"And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and slowly, and has the skill according to all shapes as it was prepared by the ingenious [person] bringing about health."
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	"Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and those which are aborted."
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	"Some are formed in the mother's womb one by one, two by two, three by three, four by four, five by five, six by six, seven by seven, and more than ten, and it has been verified that one woman aborted six, and another gave birth to all ten, fully formed, which is a cause noted by the glorious wise men through measurement."
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	"And also, it belongs to the science of the midwife to know well that which is similar in this small creature, and therefore she should pause at that until she knows what it is."
Capitol .lxxvi.	"Chapter seventy-six."
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	"About removing the fetus when it is dead."
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus according to what we have said in the section on medicine and it has not yet emerged, and you wish to use manual operation, then consider if the woman is of sound virtue and not among those with conditions which could lead to harm upon her.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then the woman should be placed on her left side on the bed, with her head lowered and her hips elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold her from both sides or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mother's mouth with humid oil and a poultice made from marshmallow, fenugreek, and sesame seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and poultices, and gently inserts it into the mother's mouth, and seeks with her hand the place where the hooks will be inserted in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And the appropriate places for this are: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be expelled from its head and position the hooks accordingly in one of these locations: its cheeks, its neck, its mouth, its palate, below its chin, at its beard, at its collarbone, near its ribs, or below its chest.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the expulsion is happening from the feet of the fetus, then place the hooks on its heels or on the middle of its back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And hold the hook with your right hand and pause its curvature in that place between the fingers of your left hand. Then gently insert your hand into the appropriate location we mentioned earlier until you reach the cause of the obstruction.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	"And then place one or two additional pillows near them to support their back, ensuring they lie evenly and do not extend beyond their usual position."
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	"And also heat should be applied to the entire area, so that the inflammation is relieved as it would be during the eradication of the tooth."
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	"And also ensure that the extension is softened with water; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully insert them and move them about with the water that is retained."
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	"Therefore if the childbirth is delayed, then let the hands be changed for another who can be more useful; and do this until the entire childbirth has been completed."
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	"But if the hand becomes stuck before the other one, and it is not possible to reduce that by pressing on it, then a cloth should be wrapped around that; and carefully pull that out until everything has been delivered, and incise either at the joint of the hand or in the elbow."
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	"And likewise do this with the other hand and with both feet."
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	"But if the head of the child is large or there is difficulty in its delivery due to contraction of the passage, or it is stuck at the entrance of the waters, then let the space between the aforementioned spinous processes be opened and cut the head and remove the water, or else use an instrument called "alundat" to perform this operation, the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows."
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	"And similarly do this if the child has a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to incise with an instrument called "gemat", or use the aforementioned "alundat" in this way as we have said; and afterwards remove the bones with forceps."
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	"And if the head has exited but is constricted behind the pubic arch, then let it be cut until the humidity that is in the pelvis has flowed out."
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	"But if there are no complications and the birth is not obstructed, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you."
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	"And if the left side of the belly is inflamed or in a state of dropsy, then it is necessary for you to pierce it until the humor that is inside it flows out."
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	"But if the child is above its own feet, then its attraction will be light and its direction towards the mouth of the mother will be easy."
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	"But if it is constricted behind the belly and the pelvis, then you should remove it with cloth that you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut the belly and pelvis until water flows from them."
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	"But if the other members are obstetrical and the head returns, then let the metron enter with the left hand; but if the mother's mouth is covered, then let the hand enter into the perineum of the vulva, grasp the head with it, draw it with the aforementioned entrance to the mother's mouth, and afterwards insert one or two hooks and draw it with those."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	"And if the mother's mouth is obstructed by an ulcerative swelling that has occurred on her lip, then it should not be troubled with that; but at that time it is necessary to administer a purge of thick humid causes."
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	"And apply poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisturize."
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	"And if the child is lying on its side, then if it is possible, turn it; and administer what we have said for a live birth."
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	"But if that is not possible, then let it be incised in pieces, and let it be removed."
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	"And you must not leave any cause inside the secondine."
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	"And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have said about the cure of ulcerative swellings that occur in the mother."
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	"And if there occurs a flow of blood, then let her drink waters that are styptic and administer the other cure."
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	"And I have seen a woman in whose belly there was a dead child, and again afterwards pregnant over that same focus, and again the child was dead."
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	"It happened to him that for a long time an ulcerative swelling appeared on his abdomen; and it swelled until the focus was covered, and he began to have pain in his arm."
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	"And I was called to cure him, and I treated him for a long time, but the plague did not consolidate."
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	"Then I applied over it poultices of strong attraction for some causes, and removed from him one bone, and after some days passed, I removed another bone. And I was very amazed, because there are no bones in the belly."
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	"And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead child."
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	"Therefore I cured the ulcerative swelling, removed from him many bones, the woman existed in good health, and already lived for a long time, running around without any pain in her arm."
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	"And I do not affirm that this is strange, but rather because in this there is science and help for the artisan physician who administers cure with his hand."
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	"Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to remove the child."
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	"Mode of treatment by which the womb is opened:"
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	"This is the form of stretcher on which the patient lies, at the ends of which are two handles for turning over the patient."
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	"But this virtue ought to be more subtle than a strap, and made either of ivy or of oak wood."
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	"And the width of each stick should be two fingers and the margin between each one also two fingers, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of two sticks there are two adjustments for that same stick which are already fixed, the length of which is about one and three-quarters palms, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more."
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the womb so that it can be opened with them when you turn the two prescribed virtues."
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	"Another form similar to this, but more subtle and lighter:"
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	"It should be made of ivy or oak wood according to the shape of forceps."
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	"But nevertheless at the end of it there are two adjustments like this, and the length of these adjustments is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers."
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	"And when you want to open the womb with them, then you make the woman lie down on her back with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs."
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	"And then you open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps to grasp according to the amount that you want of the mouth of the womb, so that it can fit where you want."
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	"The form of virtue which they said in ancient times:"
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	"The form of pushing with which the fetus is pushed:"
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	"The form of sideways with which the large head is contained"
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	"And it is similar to forceps whose teeth are at the end like this, sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like this, whose teeth are like the teeth of a comb with which it is inserted and contained."
Forma de amesidat pauc:	"The form of little sideways:"
Forma de unci havent una spina:	"The form of a hook having one spine:"
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	"The form of a hook having two spines:"
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	"The form of forceps whose teeth are like those of a lock with which the head of the fetus can be contained."
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	"The form of spatula having two extremities with which the head is cut off:"
Forma de dos espatums latz:	"The form of two broad spatulas:"
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	"All those instruments are exercised and when they are multiplied in their species and prepared by the craftsmen, it is easier to its operation and more skilled are the people because of their quantity."
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	"And do not make use of those instruments in any case, for the necessity of them is not excusable."
De extraccio de la segondina.	"On the extraction of the afterbirth."
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	"When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, then you must command the midwife to retain her breath, and then make the woman sneeze with some condition, and stretch your hand over its mouth and nostrils, and if it comes out by this means, that's good."
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	"And if not, then you take a cloth and make a hole in it and place it over the mouth of the womb with these herbs burned: calamint, rue, fennel, camomile, saffron, and costus."
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	"All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and place it over the fire."
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	"And then place a reed cane in the mouth of the womb, and keep it there until the vapor comes to the cavity of the womb."
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the afterbirth will come out quickly expelled."
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	"But if this remedy remains and is not expelled, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in althea emulsion, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the afterbirth with it. And when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the lining of the womb, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the afterbirth, extract it gradually according to rightness so that the woman does not suffer from violent traction."
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	"It is necessary that they be changed on the right and left sides with ease."
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	"And then let the traction be adjusted in quantity, for it will obey and easily become detached."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	"And if the mouth of the womb is obstructed, we have already recommended the remedy with sneezing and with medication of the cloth with herbs."
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	"But if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful not to weary yourself in repeated attempts at abstraction, but what comes out of it into the mouth of the womb must be placed on a cloth near the woman's genitals and then dress it with ointment and tetrafarmacon; for that will make it disappear quickly, dissolved and expelled."
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	"But when it has disappeared, there will be an evil odor rising to the head and stomach, and that will afflict the midwife. And then fumigations and suitable remedies should be administered."
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	"But some of the Ancients used fumigation with narcissus and dried figs."
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	"Form of an instrument with which women are fumigated during retention of menstruation and afterbirth:"
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	"It should be made of glass or brass."
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	"And the subtle extremity should be placed in the vagina and the wide one over the fire, and the fumigation should be applied to the embers of the fire."
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	"And keep that up until that fumigation is consumed and repeat another."
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	"On the treatment of the unperforated anus in childbirth."
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	"Many newborns have unperforated anuses which are very thin and closed."
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	"So the midwife must perforate that with her finger; if not, then perforate it with a sharp probe, taking care not to touch the nerve."
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	"And then place lanolin soaked in wine and oil over it; and dress it with ointment until healed."
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	"But if you fear that it may close again, then place a probe cannula in the hole for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate."
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	"And sometimes the anus closes due to consolidation of a phlegm or an abscess; then that consolidation should be incised and then dressed with what we have said about the treatment and lead."
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	"On the treatment of fistulas that form in the rectum."
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	"The fistulas that develop in the lower part of the rectum are large and thick, which develop near the anus outside or in the space between the two buttocks."
E es una fistula o motas.	"And it is one fistula or many."
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	"And with that thickness being old and running with moist white humidity or subtle pus, and sometimes there are penetrating parts from these fistulas."
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	"And these penetrating parts are recognized by what comes out of them through their exit and windiness; and sometimes the disease itself shows the exit, and sometimes it is clearly evident when worms come out."
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	"And sometimes there are penetrating parts from those fistulas entering the bladder and the glans of the penis; and these penetrating parts enter the junction of the vulva and into the opening of the vagina."
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	"And that which distinguishes a penetrating fistula from one that does not penetrate is this: when you insert your finger into the anus and find no tortuosity in the fistula, then it is not penetrating."
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	"If it is tortuosity in that area, then insert into that subtle vein of lead or horsehair until you feel the vein or hair under your finger."
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	"If you do not find anything at all and there is no evidence of obstruction, inflammation or wind, as mentioned earlier, then you should know that it is not penetrable, and therefore cease treatment."
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	"And when the fistula is penetrable into the bladder or into the urethra, its meaning is the escape of urine from there and the prevention of it, as this location is well-established in medicine."
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	"But if it is penetrable into the joint of the hip or into the bone and there is pain in the region, its sign is that the vein has entered here, unless it is tortuosity within the bone, causing pain at the outset. And from this, it always results in gangrene; and no remedy helps there, nor is it established with ointment."
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	"And in all those penetrable fistulas there is no cure at all, and the treatment of them is the fruitless labour and folly of foolish physicians."
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	"But in that which is not penetrable and is not old, healing with iron is hoped for according to what you will advise, based on what I have already said."
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	"And it is that the disease passes between your thighs and mostly on the two sides, raising its swellings within them. The hips are inclined towards the belly of it, and it enters with a tendency to plumb or earth if there is tortuosity in the fistula, so you should know the place where the vein has entered."
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	"And if that one feels the disease around his buttocks, then it is necessary for you to insert your little finger into the anus."
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you feel the vein already entering uncovered with your little finger, unless you feel something between the little finger and that flesh or skin, then you should know for certain that it is penetrable; and therefore do not treat that one, because there is no cure for him, as we have said."
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	"But nevertheless some say that some men are cured."
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	"And of the treatment by which it is hoped to obtain benefit from it, it is that you ignite cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those flesh joined by the fistula are burnt, which resemble the quill of a bird's feather."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	"And then dress that with compresses wrapped in bandages until all those burnt flesh have cooled down, and also treat it with medicines that generate and solidify the flesh. And if it is healed, well and good; but if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment."
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	"And if the vein enters but does not penetrate within the little finger which is in the anus, and between that and the vein which is veiled by skin or flesh, and sometimes the fistula runs along the surface of the thigh, then cut off the thigh from the beginning of the fistula. And you see it being cut with the vein, until the section reaches the place where the extremity of the vein has entered. And through the vein it will be freed and cured."
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	"And then cleanse those flesh joined by the fistula which resemble a bird's feather quill, and do not break them off for any reason."
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	"But if there is a flow of blood which comes between you and your operation when you are cutting those flesh, then the best thing to do is cauterize with fire or with an acute medicine, because cautery with fire has two good habits: it is the burning of those joined flesh, and the ablation of blood, exsiccation of humidity."
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	"And then dress it with compresses wrapped in bandages or in clean cloth until that place becomes sound. And then afterwards treat the wound with hard and solidifying medicine."
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	"And such medicines are those which have astringent and drying properties; when they are applied, the wound is restored and it will never be inflamed again."
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	"But if the fistula has already entered into the anus and is elongated along the surface of the body, then insert your little finger into the anus and search with it."
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	"And therefore if you feel the vein and between it and yourself there is veiled skin or flesh which prevents penetration, then it is not an operation but according to faith and hope."
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	"And therefore in this case there are three ways to proceed: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it out until you achieve the concavity of it so that you can insert your finger into it and perform the proposed cure. And do not proceed with cutting because you might wound the lappet containing the anus, which would cause great suffering for the patient without his consent. And then dress it as we have said because it will heal quickly. Or else elongate that veil and clean out the pus from there near the anus as we have said, either with your finger or with another instrument of pointed extremity. And then cleanse those flesh joined by the fistula which are in the section where you can perform cauterization. And finally strive to make the restoration of all the wound with a cut, and if the upper opening is not solidified, and the fistula remains open at the partition of the anus, then it will cause further suffering."
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	"And when the fistula is finished in this manner: it is when you insert your finger into the fistula, and on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the thigh, then take a needle with a perforated extremity which is like the one used for preparing hearts in this form:"
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	"and insert it into that vein wrapped with a thread or around those veins, and then insert your finger with the thread into the fistula until you achieve the concavity of it."
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	"But if it is penetrating into the margin of the anus deeply, then you pull out the thread from that wound in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus. And then extract the extremity of the thread and join both extremities together. Then cut each one separately, and leave it like that for one day or two days. And when you see that the thread has become incorporated into the flesh, then cut it carefully until those flesh which are between both extremities of the thread have fallen off."
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	"And then dress the wound until it is solidified and healed."
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way you are prepared to do so, but not too deeply into the anus because you should not do this yourself lest you wound the lappet. And then dress it until it is healed."
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	"The form of the spatula with spines used to open the fistula is like this: its curvature is very sharp and the other edge is not sharp so that you do not wound anything unnecessarily, as it happens often."
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	"On the suture of hemorrhoids which bleed at the incision of those."
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	"There are two kinds of hemorrhoids: one is between the buttocks resembling these coals; the other is when those are like grapes."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	"And of those there are small and large ones; some always bleed and are one; others are many and are outside the anus at its extremities."
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	"But those which are outside the anus are due to little humidity, from which yellow water or a little blood with continuous discharge comes out and they appear according to the color of the body."
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	"The cure for this condition, which affects the heart, is to order the patient to sit up and press their chest until the heart appears."
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	"Then you will take hold of one with your fingers or whatever you have at hand, and carefully cut where their roots are."
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	"However, if your fingers are not strong enough because of the humidity and softening of those parts, then you should take them with rough cloth or cotton or a piece of woolen flannel, extract them with your hands, and carefully cut where their roots are. Then sprinkle some dry powder on that incision so that it may burn those parts instead of cauterizing."
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"And then treat those parts with the other cure until they are healed."
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	"And if the wound does not close, then you should cleanse the patient with a cleansing agent that causes a small bite. Let it be washed with water from the heart until it closes gently when the patient squeezes."
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the hemorrhoids are outside of the anus, then their cause is slight, and it is sufficient for you to take them with your fingernail or grasp them with a small forceps and cut them. Then treat them with water as previously mentioned until they are healed."
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	"And for one who has had an incision made beforehand, you should administer suturing of them in this manner: Take some linen thread and wrap it around a needle. Then insert the needle into the skin at the edges above where the hemorrhoids are located. Next, make the needle penetrate into the other part of the skin at the edge below. Wrap the two ends of the linen thread around the needle in such a way that they cross each other laterally. Then tie the hemorrhoid with great tension and cut off the excess linen thread."
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	"And do this for all of them, leaving one alone and not tying it, so that the superfluous blood may flow out from there."
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	"And then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax over the anus, and also apply some on the belly. Command the patient to keep quiet."
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And then leave that alone until it heals. And when it has healed, treat it with an ointment or another cure so that it may be healed."
De curacio de fistulas.	"About the treatment of fistulas."
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	"Dryness or constriction of nature happens frequently."
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	"And if those are old and not useful in that medicine, then you must remove them with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they are wet and remove the pus on top, which prevents consolidation; and then cure them once they have consolidated."
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"Then remove those with violent scraping until the first blood comes out and they are raw; then cure them once they are healed."
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	"The key to curing leprosy is this:"
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	"Know that leprosy, the key disease, is not recognizable by any reddening of the skin like a pinhead; rather it appears throughout the body but most notably on the sides of the feet and hands, where pain often occurs."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	"And then it is necessary that this be inscribed on what is in the circuit of the key and held with forceps or tweezers and removed from its root; then cure it."
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	"And if you wish, cauterize the second one that preceded it on its head."
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	"However, a wart is a small, rough, flesh-colored elevation with a round, indented surface that appears most often on the faces of children."
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	"And its treatment is to stretch and incise it, or scrape it off with a file or pumice stone until it bleeds."
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	"If you wish, cauterize it with fire or an acute medicine, as we have said."
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	"And now that these warts and non-warts have been eradicated using the instrument that I call 'the scoop.'"
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	"However, a mole is a small, fatty or flesh-colored elevation with a rough surface that appears frequently on the forehead. When it is rubbed with a finger, it resembles the bite of an ant; they are found all over the body."
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	"And its treatment is to take a quill of an owl or vulture feather, thick and sharp, place it on the mole so that the circle of the quill contains the mole's perimeter; then rotate your hand with the quill so as to incise what is around the mole, pressing down on the skin. Then eradicate the mole from its root."
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	"And if you wish, do it with a cautery iron or red-hot needle in this way:"
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	"Make the tip of the needle thin, blunt (i.e., not perforated), and covered with something so that when you hold it, its point is smooth and easy to rotate."
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	"And if you wish, cauterize the mole according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cautery regarding the treatment of warts."
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	"On the shapes of the instruments used for cautery."
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	"Sometimes cautery is performed using silver or lead or molten iron or brass; and sometimes it is done with small or large instruments according to what is available. For example, the instrument used for treating young children should be small. And those whose handles are crooked or bent, their cauteries should also be small."
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	"The shape of a large cautery with few points:"
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	"The head of the cautery needle at its top should be wide like this; and it should have the same distance from where the purse is tied to where it ends."
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	"And the bottom end of it that is inserted into the handle should be blunt (i.e., not open) but pointed at its tip, tapering to a sharpness. And on one side there should be two holes and on the other side one hole, with the width of the holes being according to the thickness of the rays, with larger ones being smaller."
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	"And the purse in which bladder medicines from beasts or sheep wool are placed should have a root of one palm [approximately 7.62 cm]."
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	"And it should be pierced with many holes around it, so that when it is rotated, the space between the holes is equal to the thickness of your finger."
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	"And then insert strong, hot iron wire through the holes of the purse. After inserting it, fit the purse onto the cautery instrument and tighten it securely at the top of the cautery between two points with great force. Then cauterize using this method for each hole: But the key to cauterizing in this way is that you should fill the purse with the medicine, heated according to the tolerance level of the patient; be careful not to make it too hot or too cold."
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	"And then have the patient lie on their back and raise their buttocks up. Place a cloth or towel underneath them to protect them from soiling themselves. Then apply oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substance to the tip of the cautery instrument, insert it into the anus gently, then have the assistant take the purse, squeeze it with both hands and press it vigorously until everything inside the cautery is expelled from the bowel. Then remove the cautery instrument and let the patient lower their buttocks back down."
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	"If the medicine forces them to evacuate strongly, have them hold it as long as they can. And if they sleep with that in place for the whole night, it will be more effective in its action."
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	"But if you cauterize someone for disorders of the belly with evacuation and bleeding from there, then repeat the cautery procedure until they are healed."
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	"And if there are hemorrhoids or bleeding fistulas in the anus, then use a small and pointed cautery, such as those used for cauterizing children."
De curacio de las plaguas.	"On treating plagues:"
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	"I have already mentioned in the division of plague treatments what was necessary for this book. And I will now explain how to treat them using me and medicines according to their respective requirements."
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	"So I say that plagues are differentiated according to the condition in which they occur, and according to the location where the plague occurs."
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	"And the causes why plague often occurs are as follows: such as fracture of bone, or incision with knife or spear, or cut with sword, or blow with lance, club, or arrow, or similar things from many causes."
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	"But the plagues that occur in different parts of the body are as follows: such as plague that occurs on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, buttocks, and similar ones on the limbs."
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	"And I am recounting here the treatment of some plagues because this reasoning and rule can also apply to other plagues."
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	"I will begin with simple head wounds, as the treatment of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter."
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	"So I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and it is not a fracture, then consider this: if it was caused by a blow from a stone or similar object and only the scalp has been affected, and it is a large wound and you fear that there may be an abscess forming, then immediately perform a cephalic trepanation and flebotomy on the head. Do not delay in doing this, unless there is some other reason preventing flebotomy, especially if the blood that has flowed from the wound is sparse."
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	"And perform the trepanation on the opposite side of the parted wound. Keep the patient from exertion and strong drink, as well as heavy food."
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	"But if you prohibit any cause because of the minuteness of it, then let him have only light food and avoid meat and wine."
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	"And pause on the wound. If an abscess forms, cut into it with roasted rose oil or wine mixed with tragacanth gum."
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	"If you are certain of an abscess, then place hot water over the inflammation if it is recent, mixed with its blood and air has not changed that powder which I will recommend soon."
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	"If the air has already changed there, then place hot water over the ulcer until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	"If the wound is large or made by a sword cut and does not have its edges aligned due to dust, then align them with stitches according to my recommendation for wound stitching."
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	"If the wound is already open and exposed to the bone and only has slight swelling rather than retention, then incision should be made there and appropriate care given to the wound using medicines. The flesh should also be restored appropriately in place of sutures, and the patient commanded to abstain from foods that are coarse: cabbage, beans, peas, lentils and similar things, until recovery is complete."
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	"If you find putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is putrid, remove it, and dress the wound appropriately."
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	"If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows profusely and cannot be stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery. If you find that it has not been incised, then incise it with a scalpel or ligate it; if necessary, cauterize until the bleeding stops."
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	"If these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light. Therefore, you should powder them with this powder, so that they may be consolidated before the air can change them."
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	"And the method for making this powder is as follows: take one part oil of sesame, two parts dragon's blood resin, three parts myrrh resin; grind them all together and sift it. Use this powder to fill the wound and constrain it with good constriction until it adheres well and coagulates with the blood."
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	"And then apply this powder to it from above and leave it alone. Do not remove it while it is still adhering, because the medicine has not yet been eradicated from there until it is healed."
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	"Sometimes you can use only cauterization when sesame oil and dragon's blood resin are not available to you."
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	"And this same operation should be performed on large wounds when it is appropriate to place them over those and they are straitened, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not yet been altered by the air."
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	"But if the air has altered them, especially during summer time, then it is not appropriate to use this powder. In that case, treat those wounds with what we have said earlier: apply some suitable ointments over them, or use flour of barley mixed with water and honey until they become putrid; and then treat them with the other cure until they are healed."
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	"But if a fracture of the bone occurs in a wound that is small, then you should treat it with this [powder]."
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	"And I say that the treatment for fractures of the head is given above."
De las plaguas del col.	"Regarding wounds of the neck:"
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	"But if a wound occurs on the neck, there is no difference in treatment between it and a simple head wound."
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	"But if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut, then if it is a nerve, there is no other means than to avoid treatment with this [powder] that causes violent coagulation, such as vitriol and similar substances which harm nerves."
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	"And do not apply any cautery to the wound for any reason, because the substance of nerves is fragile and their continuity is with the brain, which is the master of all members."
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	"And if it is treated with light medicines in this way, such as washing the wound with warm water, sometimes infused in uncooked or cooked oil, and then applying honey when washed with warm water and other minor ointments according to this method, and moistening them."
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	"But if the wound is large, then perform suturing or fasten the lips of it, and afterwards treat it with this powder until it is healed."
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	"But if the wound has depth or if it occurs in a low-lying part that becomes putrid, then pierce it at its deepest point."
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	"But if an artery is cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary."
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	"But if the vertebrae of the spine have been severed completely and the veins of the neck are preserved, then approximate the lips of the wound over the spine with suturing without touching that part. Then elevate it gently and reduce it to its natural shape. Afterwards strengthen it with decent traction, leave it alone for a few days; and afterwards treat it with ointments that have coagulating and stimulating properties until it is healed."
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	"But if the wound has already reached the bone, then strike it with a mallet. And if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can. But what cannot be removed, leave it alone until the wound becomes putrid and separates, and its inflammation is relieved."
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	"And if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I have recommended to you."
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	"But if there is a fistula in the wound, then treat it with what will be remembered shortly in its proper chapter."
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	"Regarding wounds of the neck or similar ones that occur between the shoulders and are made with a sword, knife, lance, or similar instruments:"
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	"If it is a wound made by a lance or knife, and its depth varies according to the force of the blow, then consider whether there is any wind sound coming from the wound when the patient breathes. If so, know that the wound is mortal."
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	"And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then pause in it with the first-hour powder, but do not compress it so that the blood does not accumulate in its depth and return to the heart causing harm. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and wash it twice a day."
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	"And if the ointment is not available, then place a piece of cotton in the wound to prevent anything from flowing out, and make sure that the patient sleeps on their side so that what has accumulated flows out."
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	"But if three days or more have passed and no spasm, heart palpitations, or lung constriction has occurred in the patient, and other conditions are good, then know that the wound is safe. And so treat it with bandages and other treatments until it is healed."
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	"But if its healing is delayed and much time has passed, then know that a fistula has already formed. Therefore treat it according to the chapter on fistulas."
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	"And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the skin or flesh, then treat it with what has been previously mentioned about suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small."
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	"But if the wound has already reached the bone and pieces of it have been cut off, then turn the wound over and try to extract those pieces if they are separate."
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	"But if they are not separate, then leave them alone until the wound becomes putrid, for their extraction will be easier that way."
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	"And regarding other accidental wounds in the other members, the remedy in treatment is the same as what has been said."
De las plaguas del ventre.	"Regarding abdominal wounds:"
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	"The condition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, small, or medium-sized."
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	"Regarding large ones, sometimes the bowel or nerve of the bowel comes out, causing an entrance into them and necessitating their suturing with great care and subtlety."
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	"When extraction is requested, it is difficult to achieve by other methods, and especially if the reduction of these is more difficult, unless you quickly remove the intrusion from its place, for if it opens and becomes enlarged because the entrance was difficult."
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	"The best extraction is through the middle, for in that case it is easy to reduce the intestines, unlike in the two species mentioned above."
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	"And you should know that there are four ways to suture the abdomen, but two of these sutures are common and applicable to other wounds on the body."
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	"And the other two sutures are more specific to the abdomen, although they can be applied to other wounds as well."
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	"I will now recount each one with its exposition and explanation."
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	"Therefore I say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestines comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, there are two ways: either because of the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when inflammation has come to the intestines due to the coldness of the air."
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	"And therefore, when this is the case, you should then scrape that until you immerse a sponge or cloth wet in hot water alone, or you take water with squinant, cyperus, and spice, and bandage it around that part of the intestines so that the inflammation may be resolved."
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	"And sometimes you will find this useful in cases where there is stricturing, and it is better that the water alone be used for resolving the inflammation."
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	"Therefore, once the inflammation has been resolved, you should then moisten the intestines with water in which common salt and mallows have been boiled, for this relieves the pain caused by it."
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	"But if the pain has not been relieved by this treatment, then carefully cut the disruption a little with an instrument with which it is incised, and remove theemorrhoids."
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	"And the primary treatment is better, when it is proper that it not be cut, and there is no need to cut except in case of necessity or deficiency."
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	"What is the shape of the instrument?"
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	"The one end of it is cut sharp, and the other not sharp, and the tip is subtle, but not as subtle as a spatula, rather it is somewhat obtuse."
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	"And therefore, once the wound has been enlarged and extends outside the intestines, it is necessary that its reduction be according to the shape of nature itself in its proper place, if this is possible. For this is better."
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	"But when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the sick person lie on his back, raise his buttocks as high as his head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise his head and raise his feet as high as the sides."
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	"And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, then always pay attention and consideration to this, so that the side where there is the wound may be raised higher than the other."
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	"And this you should administer in both large wounds and medium-sized ones."
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	"And in small wounds, pay attention to what you have prepared, and especially that the person who ministers it be among your most skilled, who should hold the disruption entirely with his hand and adjust its lips together, and so that he may cover from this one to that which sews without any other cause."
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	"And this is the common manner of suturing: first take the needle, or count of needles according to the amount of the width of the wound; and then leave the end of the disruption on the finger, and thread the needle once, but do not put silk in both ends of the thread. With two ends of the silk, which is left outside the thread, enter it into that part until you have brought it out from there; and you already have four orders."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	"And then thread with doubled silk around the needle, and sometimes from two parts together, and then join the two lips and the wound by proper joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into it, and then tie that with silk in the same way as the first needle was tied. And do not cease doing this until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	"And let the needles be medium between thickness and subtlety, for the thin needles easily cut into the flesh; but thick ones are difficult to insert into the thread. Therefore they should be medium in subtlety and thickness."
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	"And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted into both ends of the thread very close together, for fear that the flesh should be easily cut and that the wound may open before its consolidation."
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	"And do not make sutures too long so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation."
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	"And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not bother the sick person while he is sleeping. And you will put powdered incense on the sutures from both sides, which should hold the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you know that the wound has already consolidated."
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	"And these kinds of sutures with needles in whatever manner are more convenient for small wounds, since it is enough to use one needle or two or around them."
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	"But the second suture is more common: and it is that you administer with sutures the four ends of the thread and both ends of the silk in one time, with a needle on which there is silk wrapped in subtlety and thickness."
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	"And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that same part where you began, so that the silk may draw back from the uppermost part of the wound to the bottom, so that the suture may be like a seam on cloth with which the threads are tightened."
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	"And put between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger."
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	"And this is what people know."
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	"And with this suture I sewed a wound which had been accidentally inflicted on a man in his belly, who had been wounded with a dagger, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm; it had exited from the intestines around two palms from the middle of the intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the member. And then I reduced that after the intestines had been forced out by the wound for twenty-four hours."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	"And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or thereabouts, and he was cured. And he lived for many years after that, and is still alive in his usual condition."
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	"And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed. And by miracle it was so, for I did not cure him with an ointment, because there was no ointment nor any medicine to be found in that place; but twice a day I put a cloth moistened with honey water on the wound until he was healed."
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	"But I say two kinds of sutures proper according to the narration of the Word."
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	"And it is that you begin with suturing the thread and insert the needle from without into within."
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	"And then when the needle penetrates into the thread and in that same part of the flesh according to its breadth and length throughout all the body, leave the end of the silk on which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from within outwards in the other extremity of the member."
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When you have caused it to penetrate once, then cause it to penetrate again in that same spot of the right side outside to inside; and leave the extremity of the spleen which is on this side, and cause the needle to penetrate into the other extremity of the inside from the outside.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And cause that penetration with which you cause it to penetrate in the spleen at the extremity of the mirror which is inside that everything may penetrate.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And start from this same side and count with the extremity which is of the spleen on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the channel which you have penetrated, and again insert it into that channel and pass through the extremity of the spleen which is on the other side with this extremity of the mirror; and withdraw it from the channel which is towards them.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this once or twice, and do this once again if you wish to do everything that is outside according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you should suture with a suturing of the skin in such a way that you should suture the spleen once from the side of the channel extremity, and leave the other side until it has been completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	Moreover, the second species of suturing which Guilia describes explicitly, and this is about it and for its recommendation, is that you should suture it according to semilunar fashion with which some surgeons suture it, so that they join every part to its corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one side and the extremity of the mirror to the other extremity of it, and this is done as you recommend.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	Certainly you should leave the needle in the extremity of the mirror at your proximity to the outside part, and make it penetrate into the inside part in that same sun, and leave both extremities of the spleen; and again turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both extremities of the spleen.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And again turn those shuttles, and make them penetrate from the inside part into the outside part through both extremities of the mirror except those which are on the opposite side.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing of which a preceding mention has been made.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the speech of Guilia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And some say that abdominal suturing is corrected with two needles, so that you should put in these shuttles a filet, and begin with the needle insertion of what is required by you, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing of those who suture the hearts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the abdomen, at that time the suturing of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of a wound is judged by other wounds.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	"The cause is that when you constrain the wound recently with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the intestine, close it, and prepare it properly, then place powdered cinnabar on it."
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	"If the air has already altered the wound, then place this powder on it with great care using these cloths that are nearby to make sure it penetrates deep and sticks well."
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	"But if you are not present, then apply the powder immediately, because it begins to heal within three days and changes every two days, as you have taught, until it is healed. For you do not need other medications in many cases when wounds are simple."
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	"But if you fear that the wound may communicate with injury to the principal members, then you should submerge lion's wool in good quality olive oil or rose oil and apply it to the area between the joints and leave it on."
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its bowels, which often happens, then crystallize this with black treacle wine and more so if the putrefaction has reached the bowel and cannot be expelled."
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	"And know that a wound in the large intestine is of lighter healing than one in the small intestines."
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	"And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called 'gegunu' does not receive healing of any wound that falls into it; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of its substance, and for the subtlety of its body and its proximity to the nature of nerves."
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	"But if what proceeds from the wound is tissue and you obtain that recent, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you also reduce intestines equally."
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	"But if it has passed into blackness and is becoming green or black, then strengthen it with faith over the area that has been discolored by it, so that fluxes of blood may come forth, for in the tissue are veins and arteries."
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	"And appropriately cut away that which is other than the membrane and leave two extremities of the thread hanging from the edge of the wound, so that over you there may be alleviated the attraction of it you must remove the scab of the tissue and emission of the branch of the wound."
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	"Remembrance of wounds when they occur in the intestine."
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	"When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be restored in some people, for this reason: one man who was wounded in his belly with a lance blow and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had no fistula, and from it there was management and windiness."
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	"Then I followed the treatment of it although it was not certain in its healing, but I ceased to subtiliate that which was inside it and the area had consolidated."
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	"And I put that I saw the area already consolidated, so I placed on him a remedy for the pain that occurred over his belly wound; and no one else suffered from this accident, and they remained in their best condition eating and drinking, and appropriately entered into baths and were exercised in their deeds."
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	"And some experienced ones have said that when there is wound in the intestine and it is small, then it is necessary to ligate it in this manner: And take figs with large heads; and appropriately adjust both lips of the wound and place one of those which has its mouth open over both lips of the wound. Then when it adheres there and tightens its mouth, cut off its head for it adheres and is not dissolved."
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	"And appropriately place another fig near the first one, and do not cease doing this with figs until the quantity of the entire wound is filled."
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	"And appropriately reduce it and sew the wound shut; and those attached heads remain inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and no one suffers from any harm."
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	"And it is possible that the intestine may be ligated with a subtle thread made from the gut of an animal attached to it because it is more like a needle; and take the extremity of these intestinal threads, and let them be well cleaned, and appropriately ligate the extremity of it with thread of it wrapped around it, and appropriately insert that thread into needles and sew it with that intestine, reducing it in the disruption."
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	"And this manner of suturing with figs is nothing but a way of trust and hope."
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	"But if the wound is large and broad, especially if it is in one of the subtle intestines, for then there is nothing but subtiliation, and not healing of it altogether."
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	"On the treatment of tumor and fistula."
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	"You should know that every wound and abscess when it becomes hollowed out and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate and emits branch always without being cut off, then universally it is named fistula, and we call it that tumor."
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	"And truly, fistula is a hard, white, tough node without pain with which there is concavity just as there is concavity of the navel; and for this reason it is called that ulcerous boil, that is to say navel."
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	"And in some people it is humid, which emits branch; and sometimes the humidity is cut off in a few hours."
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	"Sometimes this humidity is much, little, thick, and subtle."
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	"And I have already said before in the division when I spoke about wounds that every ulcer that is not healed nor on bare flesh, then it is nothing but for one of these causes: For lack of blood in the body; or because of the malice of it; or because between it and its lips there is hard flesh preventing the generation of flesh; or because it is too deep; or because that ulcer itself receives putrefaction and the matter that is sent to it is of bad quality; or because the medicine used for its cure is inconvenient; or when corruption arises in the region, and it is pestilence; or because of the property of the region such as happens in Saragossa where difficult digestion of illnesses occurs, and delay in that healing of abscess occurs naturally; or because there is a bone in it, or many bones."
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	"I have already shown all those causes and the signs of them and their cure with medicines in the division."
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	"And it is necessary that I make you know the treatment of fistula which is done by means of operation with a knife."
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	"And you should know that fistula occurs in all the members of the body; for some of them pertain to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the bladder, or to the intestine, or to the urinary bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to one of the joints composed by composition such as those of the hand and foot; and some of them have relation to the principal member and similar ones."
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	"And therefore those of these fistulas that are in this manner are among the illnesses of difficult healing and they do not receive cure and care with them is work and ignorance."
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	"And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach those places that I have mentioned and you hope for its cure but you want to know about it, then take a thread of wool or iron, and if the fistula goes straight, examine it with it."
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	"If the fistula is twisted, then examine it with a thin lead probe, for lead has the lightness of its body and curves towards the twist."
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	"And if the fistula is without any movement or horror, you will not be able to designate anything by means of it."
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	"Then crystallize the horrifics for their own sake, because the moisture with which you crystalize them will flow towards the other horrifics and run from them."
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	"And inquire meticulously in what manner you can recognize if here are the os or nerves, and whether the concavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula to which its movements are horrifics and situated above all with your utmost strength, your enteroquery, by which you enteroquery the illness, and discover the cause of pain under your compression with the hand on the location, and similar meanings and accidental causes of the apostema."
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	"And after having stood over all those causes with true steadfastness, then go to the cure according to your confidence: and it is that you consider now whether the fistula appears nearby or in a healthy place, distant from junction, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places which I have mentioned to you."
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Then dry the fistula according to what has been said about its narration earlier, and remove what is present in that filtration and of rotting flesh, and whatever is born from the horror of the flesh, or of theil and similar things, and cure it until it is healed."
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	"But if the fistula is of distant depth and is rectitudinary, then you should insert it into the pron at least as far as possible for you, and properly cleanse it from all its rotting flesh; and properly administer hot compresses wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the concavity of the fistula which you have comprehended with iron."
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	"And do this several times until the sharp medicine burns everything that is rough in the concavity of the fistula from corruption."
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	"And properly restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed."
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	"But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended."
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	"But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain about this, then examine it and dry it according to what we have recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said."
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is visible to you and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then scrape that until all corruption has been removed; and properly cure it with whatever makes flesh grow until it is healed."
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	"And if it does not heal and throws out matter as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of corruption; therefore uncover it carefully and search its cause thoroughly and perform the last cleansing with your strongest forceps, and properly restore it."
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	"And therefore if it is healed, good. But if not, then know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in that case there is nothing else to do but leave it alone."
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	"And if the corrupted bone is small or can be removed by you, then remove it with subtle forceps which are suitable for that."
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	"And if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any cause behind with your strength."
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	"But if there is any resistance caused by humidity and there is no fear or error in its incision, then incise those membranes or flesh if they are present, and deliver the bones."
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	"But if there is no preparation to remove the bones at that time, then place a plug over the wound and pack it with material which will preserve the wound. Leave this in place until the flesh and membranes have grown around the bones, and keep the plug from becoming consolidated, and strengthen the section which you have incised during your operation."
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	"Then if you fear that the wound may collapse, pack it underwater with olive oil or Egyptian pitch or one of the green ointments, for when those membranes and flesh have grown together, they separate from the bones and attraction is alleviated."
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	"But if it is a large bone like the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that with a curette alone until that blackness and corruption has been removed, and properly restore the plug."
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	"But if a large part of it is corrupted and corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that wound and incise it entirely until the point where corruption has reached. Then cure it until consolidation occurs."
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	"And I recommend to you that which is necessary for a man in his thighbone so that you place that on it as an example and assistant during your operation."
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	"A young man about thirty years old happened to have pain in his thighbone, and the cause of the pain was inside the bone marrow where there was an abscess with a large amount of pus, and it was not caused by any external factor."
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	"And thus much time passed with that due to the error of doctors in that they suppressed the abscess until a great amount of matter accumulated. Then its treatment was properly begun when the thighbone had been fistulated, and many orifices were made in it which all discharged pus and humidity from the body."
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	"And then a multitude of doctors treated him for about two years, but they did not know more in that art than I was called."
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	"And when I saw the thighbone of him and the matter that flowed out of those orifices for a long distance, then his whole body was already weakened and his complexion was yellowish."
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	"And therefore I inserted my finger into one of those orifices and reached the bone."
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	"And then I examined all of the orifices thoroughly and found that they originated from all parts of the thighbone."
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	"And then I opened and incised over one of those orifices until I discovered a part of the bone, which was rotten and corrupted and black. And already a part of the thighbone had penetrated into the muscle."
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	"And then I showed what I had discovered and prepared from that exposed bone to others."
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	I believe that the sentence translates to: "And I knew it was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I had opened and closed, and I had already drained it."
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	"And accordingly, I paused the restoration of the disease through medicine, consolidated for a long time, and not yet consolidated."
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	"And likewise, I explored and discovered on the bone secondarily on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone."
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	"And I closed what appeared to me of that corruption, and accordingly I prepared to make the cure and restoration, but it was not restored."
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	"And then you discovered it again and did not cease incising the bone little by little particularly and prepared for its restoration, but it was not restored until you incised around a palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and accordingly restored it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed."
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	"And there is no need for iteration in the operation of it and section of it except for the disposition of its frivolity and for its poverty of tolerance and fear of its death, because it has sloth in all hours due to superfluous evacuation, fainting, and evil."
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	"And therefore, it is healed by whole healing, and nothing remains in place of hard flesh; its disposition is good in its body and returns its virtue to it; it has been converted into its dispositions and does not do anything contrary to it in motion nor any harm in any cause."
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	"But if it is prominent in place of the body already broken, then you should cut that according to this manner: and it is that you take linen and strengthen that at the extremity of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that under them; and pause that first linen with a thicker second linen; and accordingly bind that over the flesh that is on the sides of the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh towards the sides, and uncover the flesh upon the place which you wish to saw, so that the saw does not harm the flesh."
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	"And pause a board or table underneath the bone appropriately, because when you do this it is forbidden that the saw not cut corrupt flesh."
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	"And it is necessary that the sawing be upon the corrupt place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, then it will be necessary to saw it again."
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	"And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then it is one continuous part joined to another, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it. Then uncover the flesh from all parts; pause wood underneath; saw that from the first part where the corruption is entered until the sawing continues into the other part."
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	"And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said."
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	"And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut that corrupt joint; saw the bone where it continues from the other part."
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	"But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but accidental."
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	"And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way appears to you and cut that away and clean that according to every disposition which is possible for you, and with each device be corrected by you when it does not do any harm to vein or nerve."
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	"And know which are the cutting tools and saws to cut these bones are many according to the situation of the bones, and their preparation, their thickness, subtlety and grandeur and smallness, hardness and rarity; because you should prepare all kinds of appropriate instruments for that operation."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	"And know that this operation signifies to you concerning the kind of instrument which you need; because if you have great study and long knowledge and experience in the methods of this art, and testimony of the methods of illnesses, then already you would know for yourself what is convenient for each instrument for every illness."
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	"And I give you here at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you should prepare with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on others."
Forma de serra:	"Form of saw:"
Forma de autra serra:	"Form of another saw:"
Forma de autra serra:	"Form of another saw:"
Forma de autra serra gran:	"Form of large saw:"
Forma de ray:	"Form of rasp:"
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	"And let the head of this rasp be in the form of a star-shaped key head, and its points be in the shape of astragalus points."
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	"And it is not convenient that with this [instrument] are rubbed the heads of joints when they are corrupted or if the mouth is large and wide."
Forma de razori major dels autres:	"Form of a larger razor than the others:"
Forma de razori menor:	"Form of smaller razor:"
Forma de razori lat:	"Form of wide razor:"
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	"Form of another saw appropriately made: let it be made in the shape of a bow as high and sharp as iron, and its member made of soft wood well formed."
Forma de lu:	"Form of it:"
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	"Form of razor with concavity:"
Forma de razori autra subtil:	"Form of another fine razor:"
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	"Form of another razor with curved end:"
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	"Form of small knife similar to an awl:"
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	"Form of cutter used for cutting bones:"
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	"Form of another smaller cutter:"
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	"Form of another cutter: this is similar to a rasp, and its end is like a saw, used in many places concerning the bones:"
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	"Form of rasp suitable for use on that which has been bored into the bones:"
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	"And its end is triangular and sharp-pointed."
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	"And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the forms that we have said concerning razors, cutters, and saws."
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	"Of cutting off extremities and sawing bones."
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	"Extremities can be removed either due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with curative medicines and the cure does not confer, sometimes the corruption goes into a member which does not persecute any cause; therefore it is necessary for you to cut off that member within which the corruption has occurred, because the illness will disappear through that of death or malice which is greater damage to the member."
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	"And the sign of that which occurs is that member becomes black within which it was covered with corruption or burning, or putrefaction appears there within which it enters that member and takes all the body; therefore cut off that with cutting."
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	"And similarly if corruption is caused by percussion of some venomous causes such as that of the sea scorpion, viper or rattle snake and similar things."
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	"And if the corruption or percussion is at the extremity of the finger, then you cut off the finger and do not give space for the corruption to go into the hand."
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	"And similarly if it occurs in the hand, then you cut off that at the wrist joint and do not give space for corruption to take hold of the forearm."
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	"And if it happens instead, then cut off the arm just above the elbow at the joint."
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	"And if corruption passes beyond that and sometimes envelops the elbow, then in that case there is death from illness; and to administer another cause for cure besides this is just quantity of virtue."
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	"And similarly concerning the foot when corruption happens at the toe of the foot, then cut it off within one of the joints."
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	"And if it takes hold on the heel of the foot, then cut off all the foot."
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	If it can enter the anus, then incise the skin at the junction of the anus.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already reached the rectum, then it is not removal but release, and let the patient die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	The method of incising the member or severing it is that you stretch the ligament at the part where you want to cut, and then stretch another ligament above the location. The minister should extend one ligament on each side of the place to be cut, and the other minister should extend another ligament above them. Then you separate the flesh between the two ligaments with a wide-bladed knife until all the flesh is exposed. Then it can be incised or severed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	It is necessary to bind the limbs on all sides so that they do not touch the location where it will be operated on, and that the patient suffers only just injury and a clean wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if bleeding occurs while operating, then cauterize the location carefully, or apply some powder made from dry red roses to stop the bleeding. Then return to your treatment until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the member gently with a bandage in whatever way seems convenient, and take care of it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I advise you that once happened to a man on his foot, this accident which you and I are discussing, which is that it occurred due to the blackness of the skin on his foot caused by burning similar to fire combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first began in his toe and then spread throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then that man prepared himself to apply pus every day since the treatment had not been effective in relieving the pain and burning sensation of the member. He incised the foot at its joint, and it healed with fire cauterization.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	It has happened for a long time that that corruption comes into the tip of the finger.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me, and I realized that that excess water had gathered on the hand with which I handled medications, precisely during the cleansing of the patient's body. And the excess water did not recede, but began to flow into another finger starting from the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to lance his hand, but I did not want to do so hoping that the excess water would recede. Indeed, I feared for the incision of his hand because the disease's strength was too great.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And after he parted from me, he returned to his land and it came to my knowledge that that man prepared himself and incised his own hand entirely, and was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I do not tell you this story except to aid those who may be afflicted with this disease, and that there may be meaning in it for the one to whom it is told and according to which it should be acted upon.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	De cura sinusum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an aposteme occurs on some fleshy member and the space of the aposteme is prolonged until it makes collection of pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus comes out from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the cord that is over it appears thus like a subtly woven cloth, and there has not been any later corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or on nerve nor on ligament, it is called sinus, and it is not called fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called fistula and not sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure for it is to incise that cord entirely as it appears, and more so when it is thin like cloth, and you make sure that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you wait for the cord to adhere and that corruption has not yet had its final course, and there has appeared a passage in the cord, then you treat it with a clyster.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when you examine the sinus, if it is large and the arm that extends from it has a fetid odor, then you clysterize it with Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and sour wine and salt receipt in equal parts, ground fine and adjusted in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it the amount that is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and you clysterize with that the sinus, and strengthen the opening of it, and leave the medicine in it for the duration of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you extract that with a probe; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleaned out and the pus is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is clysterized with water of ash when this medicine is not present; and you take the ashes of oak wood, put them on the water, then boil them and clysterize that with it until you are sure that the sinus has been cleaned out.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ash, then you clysterize it with water and honey mixed together three times, and you also clysterize it with wine and honey mixed together, because honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere more, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and you are sure that the sinus has been removed, then you clysterize it with something that makes flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you take of the powder called diafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or you clysterize it with other medicines and ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the cannula of the clyster, then you dilate it with a small iron probe little by little, and pause in it with cotton wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been dilated.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the opening is wide, then you close its lips with a suture and leave in it the amount that intervenes between the clyster without adding anything else.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening of that from which the arm extends is elevated above the parts around it, then you close it with a bitumen plaster in such a way that the arm runs within it, because when the arm is tightened by the pressure of the sinus flesh will be generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you cannot close the sinus with bitumen plaster as you wish, then you make an incision into the member after preparing it in such a way that the arm runs out of it lightly according to what seems appropriate to you and without anything inside it that could impede the movement of the arm.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take medicines that are consolidating, put them on a cloth, and apply them to the sinus as you wish to extend them over it.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of such a size that it covers all of the sinus; and then you incise with forceps on the right side of the opening of the sinus a small slit slightly wider than the opening of the sinus, and then you apply over another cloth of linen ointments of the lions according to the size of the slit, and put it on that for a distant position from the opening of the sinus so that the exit of the arm from it is relieved and the cloth does not stick too much but rather just once every few days.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is on the opening of the sinus should be removed immediately in order to remove whatever may have adhered to it from the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if what comes out of it from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment has lasted for a while in this manner and you see that the matter that is poured onto the opening of the sinus has already adhered or almost adhered, then on the third day remove it by tearing it off gently; and when you tear it off, then change the cloth for another one and renew the ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus a long distance virus subtile issues forth, then do not despair of its adhesion, because the healing of it will occur, because there are some people in whom the generation of flesh is late in their wounds, and among those who the opposite occurs.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if for many days an undigested arm comes out of the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you should apply dry medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they will be dry like diafinicon ointment when there is an excess of addition of egg yolk.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last remedy that remains is to take diafinicon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, then add old wine to it in its substance, and apply it on top of it, and use it.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And do likewise in that action when there is no arm coming out of it: apply diafinicon ointment, honey when it has been cooked until thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, grind everything and powder it over the honey while it is on the fire, then mix this onto a cloth and apply it on top of the sinus; and also apply that honey which you have cooked until thickened, powder it onto a cloth and apply it.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	"Sometimes a long-armed plaster made of celestial lily (and it is called celestial lily) and ground barley and centaurea is administered."
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	"If the pain persists and is not healed by this treatment, you should know that the corruption is in the patient's throat. Then, make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or the ligaments."
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	"For the treatment of pimples and scratched nails, and for adding an extra digit and cutting it off."
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	"A pimple is an aposteme that appears on the nail of the thumb or toe, and if it grows and its treatment is less cared for, it becomes an aposteme of cauterized aposteme, or corrupted. It emits a dark red liquid that corrode the root of the nail, and sometimes it corrupts the whole of it, and sometimes its corruption reaches the bone, causing foul odor, and the tip of the finger turns black and its color becomes dark."
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	"And therefore, when you have that with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then it is necessary for you to incise with iron all the superfluity that remains of the nail, and cauterize the wound immediately afterwards, because cautery is very helpful in this case."
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	"But if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound, but the additions of the nail begin to penetrate into the flesh inside, and start to sting and hurt it, then you should cut a thin ray from the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, push it up, and incise that flesh easily, and apply onto what remains of the flesh remedies made of corrosive substances until it is completely removed; and immediately afterwards, cure it with ointment until it is healed."
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	"But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should incise the bone and remove it, because there is no time when something corrupt in the bone can be healed."
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And if sometimes the corrosion and corruption reach the finger, then you should incise it in one of its joints according to how far it has progressed, and immediately afterwards cure it until it is healed."
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	"But if the nail receives percussion or friction and there is sharp pain in it, then you should first apply a flebotomy to the affected area, and immediately afterwards dry the nail with a fine spatula made with a transverse section from top to bottom, making sure that the section does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, because you will cause sharp pain and cause the formation of excess flesh in that location; and immediately afterwards cure that location with something that relieves pain."
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	"But this (ailment), which is found in most men, is characterized by the fact that it is very fleshy and very bloody, either in the bones or in the nails."
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	"And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some joints of these fingers."
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	"But those that are born in some joints of the finger are not painful, and those that are born at the joints are very painful."
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	"And those that are born fleshy have a thin section, and you should incise them at their root with a wide spatula."
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	"But those that are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure; therefore beware of cutting them off."
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"But those that are born in the finger above the joints should first have their flesh incised with a round incision down to the bone, and then sawed off with one of those suitable saws, and immediately afterwards cured until it is healed."
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	"But consolidation which occurs in these (fingers) between their joints that are turned outwards or by birth defect of the person born like this, or by scabbing over or burning with fire, or by being struck together, then you should cut away that consolidation until those fingers return to their natural shape."
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	"And afterwards apply between their wrappings of lint infused in rose oil to prevent them from sticking together lightly, and separate those that are stuck together or put a thin sheet of lead between them so that they may be consolidated as is necessary."
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these fingers on the palm, then you should cut away that consolidation according to how it is prepared and what is convenient for the shape of the member."
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	"Of incisions of veins, there are two kinds."
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	"Veins are varicose, and there are also large veins that are convoluted and filled with melancholic superfluities, which appear on the surface of the limbs of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the thighs, especially those of travelers, laborers, and porters."
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	"Therefore you should administer purgation of the body with black bile several times with strong evacuation, and also perform bloodletting from the patient's basilica vein."
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	"But the cure of these (varicose veins) with iron is done in two ways: one way is to incise and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to raise the vein and remove all of it."
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	"The section is done in this way: first wet the thigh with cold water to dissolve the thick blood that is like mud from the thigh. Then tie up the thigh from the affected area near its upper end down to below the knee joint with a bandage, and then incise the vein at one place or two places or three places with a wide incision, and then elevate the black blood from below the thigh upwards with the thumb of your left hand from above it downwards until you draw out as much blood as you want according to how much is enough, which relieves the power of the ailment."
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	"And then tie it up, and tell him to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	"And repeat the cure with phlebotomy when the veins are filled again, and let the patient know about this."
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	"But the elevation of these (varicose veins) is done in this way: first shave the thigh from below where they are swollen, and then put it in warm water and wet the thigh with cold water until it becomes hot and the veins are engorged; or have it exercised by vigorous exercise if warm water is not available, so that the member may be warmed up."
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	"And then cut across the cord at the right of the vein with an incision along its length or towards its end near below the knee joint, or on its lower side near the ankle."
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	"And then bind the cord with forceps and strip away the vein on all sides until it becomes apparent to touch, and it should appear very dark in color when incised."
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	"And then remove the cord and you will find a white thread that is like string."
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	"And then put your left hand under it so that it may be raised up and removed from the cord, and suspend it with one hook of gold."
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	"And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers' breadth and strip away the cord from above the vein until it becomes apparent."
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	"And then elevate it and make another incision near the ankle joint, and extract that through the previous section until it is extracted through the second section, and also extract it from the section that is above it."
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	"And do this until you extract it from the section that is above or altogether from all sections until all of it is extracted, and then close up the incision."
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	"And if you are unable to extract and elevate it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle with thread through the vein and tie it up and extract it, or put your hand inside and turn it around on all sides until it is removed."
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Be cautious that it does not slip; for if it breaks, it becomes difficult to raise that matter and it comes upon the patient through that injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Once all the air is expelled, then pause on the location of the wound submerged in wine and oil (both refined and unrefined), and care for that injury until it is healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is contracted and there are tortuous parts where there should be no bending, and it does not follow rectitude as we have said, then you must cut over that entire bent part of it and at the locations of those bends, and carefully suspend that with a hook until you raise that entire (vein).
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful with your section so as not to slip the vein and not injure it, for it will be difficult to raise that (vein); and use your discretion in this.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	**Forma de l'incident amb la qual es talla la vena:**
Forma de unci orp:	"Prepare a goat's horn."
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	"It is not like this with hooks, nor does it have an acute extremity so that it does not wound the vein; and it has rough flexibility, because if it were subtle, it would tear the vein due to its subtlety; indeed, it has excess thickness as we said."
De extraccio venae cruris.	"On extracting a vein from the leg."
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	"This vein is generated in the chambers of dry lands, such as those found in Arabic lands and the dry lands of India that are lacking in moisture and tenderness, where there is neither grass nor herbs."
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	"And this vein is also generated elsewhere in the body besides the chambers."
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	"And its generation is of putrefaction, which comes from leaving the spine like venom inside the body, producing serpents, worms, and crabs, as well as other vermin generated between the spine and the flesh."
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	"And the herald of the arrival of this vein is an inflammation that occurs in the chamber with violent swelling; and nearby, the skin becomes blistered; and near where it begins to come out from that blister, it seems like a root of a plant."
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	"And then, when the extremity appears, immediately you should wrap around it a lead weight of which the weight is that of one and a half drachmas, hanging that and leaving the lead suspended from the chamber."
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	"And whenever some cause makes it necessary to move the vein externally, wrap that in lead and fasten it."
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	"And if it is prolonged too much, then you should incise a part of it and wrap the remainder; but do not incision that until it has come out completely outside, because if you incision it while it is still inside, it will be contracted and drawn into the flesh, causing inflammation and putrefaction in the place and a bad ulceration."
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	"Therefore, it must be treated gradually and extracted little by little until it is completely outside of the body, so that there remains no cause for it within the body."
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	"And this vein can be as much as two and twenty palms in length in some people, and I have heard of one that was thirty palms."
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	"And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then introduce a probe into the track of it and pierce that with a long probe through the body until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the place for several days with medicines; and also cure it by the treatment of apostemes."
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	"And sometimes this vein has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to have many openings, each branch having its own opening."
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	"And then treat it as we have said in the division above, with what has been said about it."
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	"Regarding the cutting of worms that are generated under the skin and are called 'bovine sickness'."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	"This sickness is called in some lands 'bovine sickness' because many times it occurs in oxen and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and goes through the whole body pushing and pulling, making itself felt by its movement from member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out."
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	"And the generation of this [worm] is due to putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, earthworms, and roundworms are generated in the belly."
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	"And it is feared because of the malice of this [worm], for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, then it causes great inflammation there and enters into it, destroying the eye, which happens many times."
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	"And therefore when you want to treat this [worm] and extract it, then you must follow its movement and appearance by feeling it, and then grasp what is above it and below it with a ligature or a bandage, and dry that area and extract it."
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if it is stuck in the flesh and cannot be grasped, then apply a cautery with fire to the place where it resides until it is destroyed, for the greatest danger is that it will corrupt there, as we have said."
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	"If you want to treat it when it has reached the head near the eye, then grasp above the eyebrow with a tight bandage and dry that area, and extract it; and the patient should also use medicines to purge his body of corrupt humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	"Regarding the cutting for the sickness called 'nafrid'."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	"This sickness is called in our land 'nafrid', and it is a pain that comes to certain members, especially moving from member to member."
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	"And you have seen this before, as I will tell you."
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	"I was called to visit a woman who was ill in a certain town, and when I uncovered her arm, I saw a small inflammation on the vein of the elbow, and after an hour had passed, I saw that inflammation move like a worm pushing towards that place, but more gently than if it were actually moving, as if it were living silver passing from place to place."
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	"And then the pain came to that place and settled in the muscle, and remained there for about an hour."
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	"And then it ran through the other body until it reached the other arm."
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	"And she told me that it had turned around in her whole body as I had seen, and she was greatly amazed by its changeability and speed from member to member."
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	"And I had seen this before in my own eyes according to that manner, but I had rarely seen such pain moving from member to member."
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	"But I have not seen anything like this with my own eyes as I did with the woman."
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	"And I do not think that it was anything other than this because the woman was elderly, with a dry body and visible veins, and in this appearance at the sensation there was that wandering windiness."
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	"And it is necessary that this [sickness] does not appear according to this retrogression in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with hidden veins."
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	"And when you want to treat this [sickness], if the patient feels that pain, then do not appear before him as we have said, but grasp upon it gently and leave it alone and dry over that place until that cooped-up windiness has been discharged, and cauterize the place."
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	"But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat it by evacuating the body and using whatever expels windiness, and apply pills made of foul-smelling substances and pills of saffron and similar things."
De extraccio de sagetas.	"Regarding the extraction of arrows."
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diverse according to their species and the parts of the body where they hit, for their diversity is such that those with large points, small ones, concave ones, and blunt ones are solid; and there are those with three corners and those with tongues; also those with stars.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	There are two ways in which an arrow can hit limbs or organs: when it hits one of the principal limbs such as the head, heart, lung, intestines, and bladder, etc., and their equivalents; therefore, whenever it hits any of these members and you see signs of death, which I will discuss later, then at that time you should avoid removing that arrow from those places where death is imminent in people who are in the worst condition. But if no such signs appear, and the arrow is not hidden deep within the limb, then at that time remove it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	When an arrow strikes the head and passes through the bone, it can cause symptoms such as dizziness, headache, ringing in the ears, vertigo, redness of the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, vomiting bile, difficulty speaking or loss of voice, and there may be white, powdery moisture present at the wound site, with the surrounding skin appearing wet.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore, if these signs appear, then you should abstain from treating and removing the arrow unless it is externally visible.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	When an arrow strikes the heart near the left nipple and is embedded deeply in hard tissue, it may cause symptoms such as irregular heartbeat like the pulse, black blood flowing from the wound, coldness of the extremities, cold sweat, fainting, and sudden death. Therefore, you should know that death will occur immediately unless the patient receives prompt treatment.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	When an arrow strikes the lung, there may be frothy blood sputum coming from the wound, and the vessels near the collarbone may become congested. The patient's complexion may change, they may exhale loudly or gasp for breath, and experience difficulty breathing due to pain.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	If an arrow strikes the diaphragm (the veil of the ribs), there will be pain near the lower ribs. The patient may experience sudden, intense pain in the chest and back, accompanied by sighing and shortness of breath. All the muscles of the body may become rigid and tense.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	If an arrow strikes the stomach, there will be vomiting of undigested food from the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If an arrow strikes the abdomen and becomes lodged within it, there will be a visible wound or tear in the skin, tissue, or intestine, which may be ruptured. There is little hope for recovery if the arrow is removed in such cases.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If an arrow strikes the bladder and urine is excreted from the wound externally, with other bodily fluids flowing out as well, there will be severe pain in that area. You should know that such a wound is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	"However, other members such as the face, neck, and back, shoulders and arms, spinal column, collarbone, thighs, legs, and their similar parts are saved according to major dispositions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not venomous."
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	"I will tell you what I have seen about this kind of arrows, so that you may understand about their treatment."
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	"The reason for this is that when an arrow entered the tear duct of a man's eye near his nose, and you removed it from another opening, leaving behind the point of the arrowhead in his ear, he was healed and there was no harm done to his eye."
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	"And another arrow was removed from a Jew who had it in his eye near the eyelid, leaving behind the eyelid afterwards. The arrowhead was already covered and could not be found except for a small extremity that adhered to its shaft, which was a large, sharp Turkish arrow with a lion's head made of iron without ears."
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	"And the Jew recovered, and there was no harm done to his eye."
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	"And another arrow was removed from a Christian man who had it in his buttock. It was an Arab arrow with ears and you cut into it between two guide rings where it was already submerged in his buttock; then you pulled on it carefully and finally extracted it. The Christian man recovered."
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	"And another arrow was removed from a man who had it in his belly, and he thought that he would die because of it. Therefore, since thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, you cut into the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered, and there was no harm done to him."
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	"And I saw another man in whom an arrow had become stuck in his back, and the wound had closed over it. Since it had been there for about thirty years, the arrow was extracted from the root of the matter."
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	"And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had become stuck in her belly and the wound had closed over it. Her condition did not change in any way, nor was there any harm done to any of her natural functions."
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	"I saw another man in whom an arrow had become stuck in his face and the wound had healed over it. When the arrow was removed, he felt almost no pain."
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	"And the arrow of the king's steward that was stuck in his middle nose and had already deviated slightly to the right, was completely hidden."
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	"And you were called to treat him because of the entry wound of the arrow within three days."
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	"And therefore you opened the wound of the arrow very carefully. Then you inquired about it with a delicate touch and did not feel it, but he felt a puncture behind his right ear; therefore you thought that that puncture was because of the extremity of the arrow."
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	"And you widened the area with an ointment that has attractive and digestive virtue, making sure that the area around it is dry so that the location of the arrow becomes apparent."
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	"And there was no significant harm in the place where the arrow had reached it. And I continued to apply the ointment to him for many days, and there was no harm done. And the wound healed during that time, and he recovered from the pain of the extraction after several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and told me so."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	"And then you applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened. And with your touch you felt that one end of the arrow adhered to its shaft."
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	"And approximately you adjusted the application of that corrosive medicine until I could see the extremity of the arrow very clearly. And I spent some time like this for about four months."
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	"And after the wound had become larger and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I remained there and did not cease to devise and experiment with various methods until one day I began to extract it using various methods of traction with forceps made specifically for this purpose, as will be explained in detail later, until I finally extracted it; and then I restored that wound."
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	"And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, but I restored it and the wound healed completely, and the pain was entirely cured without any residue remaining."
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	"And I tell you about the extraction of some arrows because you can pause here and find meaning in what I have not said, since the parts of this art and its definitions are not understood through mere narration nor comprehended by this book."
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	"And the wise artisan compares little things with many; and what is present with what is absent. And he finds new operations and new instruments whenever foreign causes occur."
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	"And therefore I say that arrows are not forced out of the limbs in which they have been stuck except by two methods: either by attraction of the place where it has entered, or by the opposite direction of the other part."
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	"And that which is forced out by the place where it entered is either an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location and is attracted and pushed out."
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	"And if it does not obey extraction at the time when it is caught, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh around it has softened and its attraction and exit are facilitated."
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	"And similarly if it is stuck in bone and does not obey extraction, then leave it for some days and repeat the attraction and movement each day until it comes out."
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	"And if it does not obey extraction even after some days have passed, then you must drill around the arrow in that bone with a fine awl until the location of the arrow is widened and then extract it."
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	"And if the arrow is stuck in the skull bone and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain and some of those accidents which I have mentioned appear in the illness, then abstain from extracting the arrow and leave it alone until his condition improves for several days because if the arrow reaches the brain, then death will not be prolonged."
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	"And if the arrow is stuck only in the hollow of the bone and does not pass into the brain and the illness remains for several days without any cause of those accidents occurring, then you should devise means to attract the arrow and also to attract it."
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	"But if it is deeply embedded and does not obey extraction, then you should administer awls around the arrow as we have explained, and then treat the location until it heals."
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	"But if the arrow has already disappeared in the location of the body and is beyond sensation, then you should search for it with your touch. And if you feel it there, then attract it using some instruments which are suitable for that attraction."
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	"And if you cannot reach it because of the contraction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then cut through the wound until it is widened and the arrow can be extracted."
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	"And if it is stuck in the ear with which it is held, then carefully cut away all the flesh around where it has entered using any device you can devise. And devise means to facilitate the exit of the flesh through the fracture of the ears and torsion of those until it comes out."
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	When you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it may be, then use a tweezers with your hand and forceps at all parts within that it may perform that operation; and subtly with extreme care that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction of it and that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot extract the arrow during your time of work, then leave it for a few days until the parts that are in the circuit around it have healed, and then operate when the swelling has decreased.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then administer that which we have said about cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of incision of vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer ingeniously in every possible manner the evacuation of the arrow; and do this with ease and calmness and slowness and steadfastness as you and it is recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And then cause the arrow to contract so that the wound is according to the figure according to which the arrow was designed to enter it, for it is more useful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But arrows that are shot in contrary of the other wound, or those from which some other wound proceeds to the wounds outside, or cause swelling around the end of the arrow by feeling the wound above the nearby bone and raise that prominence; then cut over it; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold of it; and then pull it out, for it is easily extracted.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is retained in the bone, then twist your saw according to the contrary direction in which the arrow enters the bone, and amplify at its middle part, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it there for some days, and then extract it when it is loose enough to be pulled out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in that, then push it through with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then insert this, if it is blunt, turn concave so that its concavity enters the cavity of the arrow and then push it through with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then push this with force entering into that, for the arrow is relieved by this.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is barbed, then it is necessary for you to cut away all the flesh in which the wound is, if that is possible for you, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow enters the bladder, or the belly, or the thigh, or the side, and is close so that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut over it, then cut over it and guard yourself from cutting any vein or nerve, and extract it, and then stitch it up if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	"Their extremities are like bird's beaks that are made with saw when they seize upon the arrow so that they do not let it go."
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	"Among these are made many species, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the arrow's size and its thickness, and the width of the opening, and the tightness of it."
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	"To push this concave extremity like a bird's feather so that the entrance of the arrow may be eased within it, and push of that ear."
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	"How to push the concave extremity:"
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	"Like this way so that it may ease the entrance of it into the concave arrow and is pushed with that."
De fleubotomia de las venas.	"Venous phlebotomy."
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	"The veins that are usually phlebotomized are 30, of which 16 are in the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears, called 'earlids', two veins visible on the temples, two veins located in the lacrimal canals of the eyes called 'tear ducts', one vein prepared at the middle of the forehead, and one vein located at the tip of the nose. There are also two veins on the neck and two veins on each lip. Additionally, there are two veins located behind the tongue."
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	"The veins that are phlebotomized in the arms numbered five. These include one cephalic vein located on the outer side of the arm which is commonly called 'the vein of the head'. There is also a median vein formed by branches of the basilica and cephalic veins, known as 'the vein of the whole body' to the common people. The basilica vein is located on the inner side of the arm and is called 'citillar' or 'vena del ventre' in vulgar language. The radial vein lies over the forearm and is used for phlebotomy when it appears prominently at the pulse. The savatella vein lies between the auricular nerve and the little finger, consisting of two branches."
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	"And in the thigh and leg there are three veins: one is located on the outer side of the curvature of the knee joint on the outer thigh, another is the saphenous vein located on the inner side of the thigh near the knee joint, and the third is the sciatic vein located on the outer side of the thigh. There are also other veins in the leg similar to these."
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	"The benefit of phlebotomizing the veins near the ears is for treating ancient headaches, migraines, facial tics and ulcers on the face or head."
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	"And the method of phlebotomizing those veins is as follows: first, shave the patient's head. Then, rub the head with oil on both sides of the occiput using a large cloth and good friction. Next, make the patient bend their neck with a cloth tied around it so that two points near the ears appear at the front of the head. Use your index finger to find those veins and feel their pulse."
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	"Then take the lancet called 'cutellar', which is pointed, and introduce it into the vein on the elbow until blood comes out."
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	"And raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards, then make an incising cut into the vein with a pointed incision."
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	"And make the length of the incision about two fingers' width or thereabouts, then let as much blood flow out as you wish."
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And afterwards, apply powder and a bandage to it so that it may heal."
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	"Before the start of this book, there was an incision made on them and their cauterization."
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	"More often than not, the two venous arteries that surround the temples serve as the location for phlebotomy in ancient times to treat migraine, headache, and frequent eye disorders. They also help to alleviate excess heat from the body."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is according to what you recommend to him: constraint the patient's illness with your hand firmly and visibly appearing on both veins, demonstrating the pulse of their vessels beneath your fingers. And then you will know how to proceed."
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	"And thus you raise the cord above the vein at its branches using your index finger, and insert the phlebotomy lancet beneath it, raising the vein up. Then cut it similarly as you did with the other two veins, allowing blood to flow according to your need."
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And thus release the pressure of the illness, and keep your finger on the vein for about an hour. Then apply a compress to that area with cotton and powder, strengthening it above with firm constraint, allowing it to heal within."
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	"And already at the beginning of this book, the memory of them (the veins) and their incision have been preceded."
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	"And therefore, phlebotomy of the frontal vein is appropriate for treating ancient facial diseases such as cephalic migraine and rigor (spasm), and also for fetid ulcers."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the quality of phlebotomy on him (the patient) is according to what I recommend to you: so that the illness strengthens its own vein with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument called 'fossor' whose form is as follows:"
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	"Press the prominent point that is at the head of the 'fossor' upon that vein and percuss it with your thumb or another cause in this manner, allowing blood to flow according to the quantity you desire. Then release the perforation of the illness and strengthen it within so that it may heal."
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	"And sometimes it is useful to use a blunt phlebotomy lancet, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy lancet have an acute extremity like the others. Rather, its lateral extremity should be blunted so that the bone does not break it when it is thin."
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	"But the recommendation of these two veins (the angular and frontal veins) is for the lacrimal glands of both eyes for scabies of the eye with rigor and seborrhoea in the eyes, and for facial diseases."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	"And the quality of phlebotomy is that you strengthen his vein with a bandage, and then perform phlebotomy on him, standing above his head."
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	"And let the phlebotomy be done obliquely along its length with a small phlebotomy lancet, because in that place there is not much flesh. And if the phlebotomy lancet is thin, it may break its point."
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	"And then let blood flow as much as you need, and pause on that spot, and strengthen it overnight with a bandage, and then release it."
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	"But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent headache, and also for facial diseases, migraine, rigor that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on him is that you strengthen his vein with your left hand and then take hold of his nose with your right hand. Then take the sharp phlebotomy lancet and place it in the middle of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to touch here, and because blood begins to flow immediately."
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	"It is necessary that you withdraw your hand gradually with the phlebotomy lancet and make blood flow according to your need. Then bind it overnight because that vein heals easily."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both saphenous veins is for constriction of the knee and for the beginning of leprosy, and for many diseases, itching, and corrupt ulcers like herpes zoster."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on those veins is that the patient should strengthen each vein with a bandage around his thigh. Then the operator should stand above the patient's head while the patient is seated on a chair."
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	"And then perform phlebotomy on the long saphenous vein with an ample phlebotomy lancet little by little. Then extract blood according to a moderate quantity or according to what seems necessary at that time. Then do the same for the other vein."
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	"And then untie the bandage and strengthen both veins with a middle ligature so that the patient is not fainted. Then leave him until morning because the swelling will be healed."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy on the veins of the arm is for small abscesses and pustules of the mouth, corruption of the gums, and corrupt ulcers and fissures. Also for ulcers that are in the nose and around it."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	"And the quality of phlebotomy on those veins is that you make the patient sit before you and strengthen his vein with a bandage. Then turn back his lips and observe both veins, one of which is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each is by its blackness, and especially because there are small black veins around them. Then cut each one with an incising incision."
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	"But if there is doubt about which vein you should cut, then observe the incision of the larger one and the manifest pus from that one."
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And perform phlebotomy on both veins that are in the upper lips."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	"More customarily, incise both veins that are in the lip."
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	"Of the two veins that are on either side of the tongue, it is most appropriate for phlebotomy to be done at the level of the cephalic branches that are in the gulley, at the malady of the uvula, and at maladies of the mouth."
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	"And the quality of phlebotomizing this is that one follows the malady between their two largest veins, elevates their tongue, and regards both sides of it, observing the vein on one side and the vein on the other; and the color of each is inclining towards blackness."
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	"And then phlebotomize each one; but be careful not to pierce too deeply with your hand in phlebotomizing these ones, for there are arteries nearby."
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those which are commonly found in all men, and their phlebotomy is performed in two ways: either by putting a mirtilated or olivated flebotomy needle to subtly incline, or by cutting with a flebotomy scalpel, and calling it if necessary; and this is its form:"
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	"And this 'if necessary' means that one adapts to the section and of those there are specialized sides and subtle ones according to the width of the veins and according to the narrowness of them."
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	"Form of phlebotomy with mirtilated needle:"
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	"It should be like this: first, as often as possible, and adapt to opening the veins that are concave and full, proceeding with apparent large ones; and those that contain thick, turbid blood."
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	"And this is the form of phlebotomy with an olivated needle:"
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	"And this phlebotomy has a smaller width and more subtle tip; it is suitable for phlebotomizing those veins that contain subtle, citrine-colored blood."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	"But the main benefit of phlebotomy from the basilica vein (one of three veins) is that it extracts blood from those illnesses which are on the left side of the neck and collar, and from whatever affects the chest and belly."
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	"And it is appropriate for the phlebotomist, when performing a phlebotomy on that [vein], to carefully watch over it and be cautious in it, because there is an artery nearby; if he errs in the puncture of the phlebotomy needle, he will injure that artery and cause a flow of blood. Therefore, it should not be phlebotomized with a pointed phlebotomy needle, but rather cutting with a scalpel."
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the basilica is not apparent by manifest appearance, then you should leave it and move to another one of its branches; or phlebotomize at the end of the arm where that is manifest. And cut that with a scalpel needle as we have said."
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	"But if you want to phlebotomize the median vein, then first at the bend of the arm where you know the pulse location, and approach gently with your fingers. Then lift up the arm and cut the vein with a concave section using a scalpel needle as we have said; and be careful not to cut too deeply for some space from the artery."
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	"And when you press with strength, if it swells in the place where you have touched with your fingers, then that swelling is a swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid that."
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	"And if the blood flows in the phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is red, then know that it is blood from the artery. Then quickly lift your finger off of it for some distance; remove your finger, and if the blood ceases, because often it does cease, then press on the arm and leave it."
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	"And guard against the disease of the wound and be careful with it for some days until it is healed so that it does not fester."
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	"But if the blood does not cease and you know that no medicine is present for this, then you have injured the artery. If it appears to you, because its extremity is contracted and the blood has ceased; or take a cloth of figs and press upon it, and then take one handbreadth of lint and press it on the place of the vein with pressure descending with a bandage and powder for another day."
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	"And then if the blood has ceased, that is good. But if not, then cure it with whatever was mentioned earlier at the recollection of the place where the powders cease the flow of blood."
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	"And the stopping of the blood from it is difficult in many dispositions due to the small size of the vein and the possibility of injury to the arm."
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	"But phlebotomy of the dark vein is useful because it removes blood from the rising part of the head and from the descending part of the trunk. For this reason, because it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalica, as we have said."
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	"But it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be careful in phlebotomizing that one because nearby there is a nerve. And therefore if he errs in the puncture of the phlebotomy needle and touches the nerve, then stupor will occur, and its healing is difficult; often it does not heal completely. This nerve can appear to sensation; but sometimes it may be hidden at some people and is subtle and not visible. Then you should pause the phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize with a scalpel section, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein lengthwise."
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	"The benefit of phlebotomizing the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and alleviates diseases of the eyes."
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	"And in this particularly, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture with an olive-shaped needle or a myrtle-shaped needle; because it is safer than all other veins, for there are neither artery nor nerve nearby."
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	"But however you should phlebotomize so that with the phlebotomy needle you do not puncture only the head of the muscle; but rather seek a lighter place, and do not touch it unless it is touched first by percussion several times."
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	"But often an aposteme appears in some people when they are not phlebotomized at the first percussion; but do not touch that aposteme."
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	"But the quality of this phlebotomy and its accidents are many, about which you should consider their correction."
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	"The first one is that you should know that phlebotomy is administered only for the conservation of health and with hope of improvement and caution against the occurrence of diseases. And it should be done on one of the veins which are in the elbow: cephalic, dark, or basilica; and it should be done at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and after eating in winter when signs of repletion appear."
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	"And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or at least three hours later than midday."
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	"But phlebotomy that is administered when convenience and necessity require it can be done at any time, day or night, at any hour and at any time."
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	"And children should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old; and pregnant women should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month and up to seven months. And elderly people who have already passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized."
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	"And when someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's claw enema; especially if there is much retained feces in them. For if the veins absorb superfluities from the intestines during phlebotomy, which have been cleansed, it will not harm the principal members."
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	"Let not patients suffering from sacred and profane drunkenness nor those who flee from sickness or drunkenness be phlebotomized until this is removed from them; also let not patients with dropsy be phlebotomized. Rather, phlebotomy should be feared in cases of sudden passion, vomiting, windiness of the belly, multiplication of coitus and labor, excessive exercise during fasts or vigils, or any cause that dissolves virtue."
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	"And consider in the refinement of humors beforehand whether the blood is thick, from excessive foods and drinks, and if so, medicinally thin it if possible."
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	"And also enter into a bath, if no cause forbids it, or exercise somewhat for the blood to be subtilized."
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	"And pause the phlebotomy from there in the foot until about the hour of Terce, as we have said."
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	"And continue so that the foot of him who has been phlebotomized is guarded from all evil animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, such as excessive labor, pain, coitus, and like them."
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	"And let his seat be prepared with the causes in use by men with aromaticity and fragrance, and with balsams and like them according to their quantity of possibility."
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	"And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is softer than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	"And then extend his arm, and rub that of the phlebotomist with his own hand two or three times; and then strengthen the ligature with a rope and wrap it twice."
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	"And let the ligature be moderate, for if it is not equal, or there is superfluity in the ligature, then fluxes of blood are prohibited; or if it is with softening, then the course of the blood is impeded equally."
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	"And then, before making the ligature, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together until the veins are inflated and clearly felt."
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	"And then the phlebotomist should anoint his lancet with a little of proper old oil; and then place his index finger of his left hand over that vein where he wishes to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein may flee a bit, and percuss the vein gently until one finds a vein that feels like a cord fleeing under the phlebotomy site. And those veins are full of windiness, and when one pauses the lancet on them, they contract under the lancet, and become visible to the phlebotomist; and if the lancet touches the vein, then it is narrow."
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	"And thus, let the phlebotomist be careful and attentive to all these causes."
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	"And then pause the lancet, but if the vein is not opened in one attempt, then it is good. And if not, repeat that attempt on another vein nearby, or press down with haste, if there is no aposteme."
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	"And if the site is apostemated or the patient becomes worse, then let him be left for a day or two, and do not strengthen the ligature, lest it draw out the aposteme too violently, nor introduce into baths."
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	"And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary."
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will flow out, then repeat the lancet in that tract according to rectitude and adjust it a little at the opening, and do this with haste before the site becomes apostemated, for the site becomes apostemated in most men with but little opening."
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	"But if the site is already apostemated, then do not repeat upon it, lest you have cause for blame. And pause upon some part of the oil groove, for it alleviates the course of the blood."
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	"And it is better in this location that oil, and other oils."
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	"And similarly administer an oil groove in all phlebotomies where veins are opened against the prohibition of blood flow, and do this with treacle, almonds, and saffron when pausing from one of these upon the site, for blood is subtilized and circulated when it is thick."
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	"And if a large aposteme is generated at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, and especially to those who are not bled until that attempt, or where the vein opens but little, then apply a poultice, and pause upon the site with a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scraped, and press it for an hour, for it dissolves."
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	"And he should do this also at the time of stopping the flow of blood from that vein with a ligature or another vein."
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	"And if there remains in the site for some days a little blackness or greenness, do not notice it. And if you wish, pause upon that with some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or chamomile, or similar."
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"And many times apostemes and elevations occur due to phlebotomy at the basilica [i.e., temple of the head]."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	"And then pause your hand upon that, and if you find softness under your compression on it, then that elevation is evil and bad. And therefore be careful to pause upon it with some cause of what we have said, lest blood flow violently from the artery."
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	"And make an emplaster with that in which there is astringency, so that the site may be endured. And then treat it with another cure until it is healed."
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	"And each person should have blood extracted from him according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color prevailing over his blood as it appears."
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	"For if the blood is black, then let it flow out until it becomes red. And similarly if you find it thick, then let it flow out until it becomes subtilized. And likewise if it is acute, until its sharpness is abated."
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	"And he should amplify the phlebotomy of the vein and make the lancet broad for that person who is full and strong and has need of bloodletting in one attempt."
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	"And in the thin person, let the opposite be done, and let that person have blood extracted from him in several attempts, and let the tract be narrow."
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	"And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of veins is a transverse section, not puncture."
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	"And this manner of phlebotomy is saved from flux of blood and incision of nerves. And it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude."
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	"And to that one upon whom syncope is accustomed to occur during phlebotomy, you should take care of him before phlebotomy with a little bread infused in verjuice or simple syrup scraped. And extract blood from him in three or four attempts."
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	"And if there is coldness of temperament, then take before phlebotomy bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic syrup sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in syrup that is aromatic and very fragrant."
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	"And if syncope occurs during phlebotomy and it is due to much blood loss, then let him drink water of flesh and very fragrant syrup. And use aromatics with aloe, and let him rub his forehead with that."
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope from evacuation."
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	"To swell the patient's arm and dissolve their blood according to their constitution, apply to them that which is suitable for much evacuation, whose power is frog, which expels blood gradually, as per the quantity of its power in continuous days."
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	"He who wants to swell his arm and draw his blood again, and whose body is robust, let him do this about seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	"He who wants to draw blood from his body against the part that declines, let it be done on the second or third day after swelling."
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	"He who has little blood already shed in his body and feels weak and experiences fever, let a lot of blood be drawn from him at once, and increase the aperture gradually until he faints; but you must keep all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on his pulse while letting the blood out, so that death does not occur instead of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	"And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood again, after the opening of the vein has already closed and it is difficult to draw blood, do not press hard under that arm with a curved hand, for that is too rough."
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	"After performing phlebotomy again, let him rest until he is phlebotomized a second time; or remove the acuteness of the phlebotomy that has coagulated blood in the opening of the vein; or place upon it some tyriaca alfarach, or sagzeneia, and compress it with light compression until the blood is completely expelled."
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	"And if the vein is inflamed, leave that one alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	"And if there is a need to evacuate blood again and there is no excuse, then do it on the same spot or in another vein of the other arm."
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	"And the vein called 'funis of the arm' is phlebotomized instead of the cephalic or basilic veins when they are not visible or are hidden, for it consists of those."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his hand in cold water until the vein becomes engorged and appears clearly."
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	"And approach should be made with a bandage with moderate tension over that with a median strap; and phlebotomy should be performed according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor longitudinally."
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	"And let the opening be wide, and perform your phlebotomy with the same vein that you phlebotomize above the junction of the hand a little."
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your need is satisfied."
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	"But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and in winter, it is prohibited to cool the body with cold water."
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	"And phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves."
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	"And phlebotomy of the saphenous vein on the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that you bind the hand with a bandage or your hand, after having placed it in cold water, until the vein becomes inflamed and clearly visible to view; and approach and phlebotomize it transversely; and if you hit upon something else, do not remove that from there."
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	"And be careful not to finish the phlebotomy with your hand, for beneath it are the nerves of those denuded of flesh."
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	"And approach again immerses the hand in cold water and let the blood run into that, for if you do not immerse it again in the cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow."
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	"And when blood has been extracted according to the quantity needed, then place upon the vein oil and salt so that it does not become consolidated suddenly; and do likewise in all veins that are straight."
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	"But the benefit of phlebotomy on this vein of the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen."
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	"And do likewise in performing phlebotomy on him as you have done in the other."
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy of the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower parts of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and for diseases of the thighs and ulcers of old sores, and similar diseases."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient immerses his foot in cold water and makes friction until the veins appear clearly; and he places a bandage over the junction of the foot; and the point of the vein appears below the said projection, and from there it branches into many small ramifications on the surface of the foot."
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	"And then phlebotomize the most prominent branch or that which is below the heel below the aggregation of it, for it is better and safer."
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	"And if you phlebotomize it on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are beneath it on the surface of the foot, and finish your phlebotomy with the one with which you phlebotomize transversely, as if you wanted to incise it."
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	"And let the phlebotomy be sufficient."
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	"But if it is prohibited to let blood, then immerse his foot again in cold water and let the blood run into that until it is evacuated."
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then approach again with the phlebotomy tool and remove a little more, for the location is safe; and do not fear hurting him, but be careful of the nerves as we have said."
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	"And do likewise with the saphenous vein of the other foot."
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	"And of the sciatic vein, its location is as we have said beneath the heel below the head of the fibula on the outer side."
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	"And the benefit of phlebotomy on it is for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood."
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on him is that the patient enters into a bath and makes haste and strengthens his thigh on the side of the hip above the heel and binds it with a long thin bandage so that nothing else appears there."
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	"And then when it appears, then phlebotomize it according to each vein that you can and according to the transverse direction, which is better; or incise it with incision or cut it with sectioning, for its location is safe."
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	"And it is found in many men with difficulty; and if you do not find it at all by touch, then phlebotomize some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot near the said auricular and annular bones."
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	"And be careful of the nerves, and let flow the quantity of blood that you wish."
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	"And then loosen the bandage and place over the location of the phlebotomy a cotton wick soaked in honey or olive oil to strengthen the location, for it is healed easily."
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	"Of cupping (ventosization) and of the qualities of using those instruments."
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	"Cupping is done with horns, or earthenware, or glass."
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	"And cupping is done in two ways: one with scarification and bloodletting, the other without scarification."
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	"And this wound-cleansing is done in two ways, either by fire or without fire."
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	"And the thirteen locations on the body where wounds are administered with scarification and bloodletting are as follows: the first is placed on the forehead, which is the final part of the head; the middle one between the two parts of the neck; those under the chin near the jawbone but below the mouth; those on both spatulas; those on either shoulder, located at the end of the upper arm; those on each elbow, which are at the bend of the arm; and finally, those on both thighs."
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	"And bloodletting does not extract blood from the large veins, but only from the small ones scattered throughout the flesh. Therefore, it does not draw out the humor in that way, just as phlebotomy does; nor is it necessary to perform bloodletting with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess, until the entire body has been purged."
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	"But if bloodletting is necessary due to illness or continuity, it should be administered at the beginning, middle, and end of each month, as well as at any other appropriate time."
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	"This cause is for those men who have an excess of blood that needs to be extracted through bloodletting and whose face appears grave and swollen. Those who show signs of congestion and heat in their face, head, and neck also require bloodletting. Those who exhibit paleness in their face and forehead and dullness in their eyes are also candidates for bloodletting, as well as those who spit out blood or have a bitter taste of blood in their mouth. Bloodletting may also be necessary for those whose laughter is excessive, those who sleep excessively, those who experience night sweats, fevers, chills, plagues, and other causes that resemble each other."
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	"And thus, whenever any of these causes occur, and especially if it is on the third or middle day of the month, we command bloodletting to be performed after two or three days have passed from that day."
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	"And the benefit of bloodletting from the neck is that it helps to alleviate heaviness in the head and prevent fainting spells. However, it is necessary that this be an appropriate evacuation of the entire body."
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	"And this bloodletting takes place at the location for phlebotomy on the cephalic vein."
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	"It is not recommended to perform bloodletting on someone with plethoric constitution or a catarrhal condition, as this can cause great harm."
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	"And therefore, it is not necessary to perform bloodletting on the elderly, nor on those whose illnesses are caused by heat."
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	"But whoever persists in bloodletting will forget this practice. Therefore, it is necessary that you command the phlebotomist to pause his hand slightly before removing the cupping vessel at the end of the session, so as to prevent the generation of forgetfulness."
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	"But bloodletting for asthmatics takes place at the locations for phlebotomy of the dark vein and basilica vein. For this reason, it helps to relieve asthma, constriction of the throat, splitting of the windpipe, coughs, and congestion."
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	"And it is necessary to withdraw the cupping vessel for asthmatics slightly, because if it is paused too long, it can generate weakness in the body and stomach."
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	"And bloodletting for headaches helps to relieve accidental pains in the head and ophthalmia, migraine, and inflammation, as well as pains in the roots of teeth. It takes place at the location for phlebotomy of the basilica vein."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	"And it is necessary that you command the phlebotomist not to press his hand during scarification, so that he does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding."
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	"And bloodletting from the chin helps to relieve bad breath in the mouth, gum disease, and other oral conditions. It takes place at the location for phlebotomy of the artery that is on both lips."
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	"But bloodletting performed between the two spatulas helps to relieve heatstroke, which occurs due to an excess of heat."
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	"And bloodletting performed between the two divisions of the cheeks helps to relieve flebotomy of three veins: the basilica, dark, and cephalic veins. This is because it attracts blood from all those small veins that are in the flesh, as well as from the other small veins connected to the larger veins, so that the attraction reaches these three veins."
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	"And command the phlebotomist not to proceed with scarification because that location is devoid of flesh and therefore has nerves and arteries close beneath the surface."
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	"And it is bloodletting performed on the shanks that helps to relieve hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers of the perineum."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	"And it is necessary that you command the phlebotomist to perform a large bloodletting with a sharp cup because this location requires strong extraction, and subtle cups do not draw much blood when used alone; therefore it should be scarified."
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	"But bloodletting performed on the fleshy part of the forearm helps to relieve chronic pains in the kidneys and womb, as well as the bladder. It stimulates menstruation and relieves both dropsy and obesity. It takes place at the location for phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and the horizontal vein, as well as two small veins."
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	"But it can also greatly weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many men."
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	"And bloodletting performed on the horizontal vein offers relief similar to that of bloodletting performed on both arms."
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	"The quality of the position of bloodletting is that at the beginning, the cup should be placed vertically and followed by gentle suction, without prolonging the position of bloodletting too much. Instead, pause it lightly and remove it carefully so that the humors come to the location naturally."
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	"And do not cease repeating this until you see that the location has become reddened and swollen, and that the blood begins to appear."
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	"And then scarify and repeat suction little by little, taking care to consider the disposition of the patient's constitution."
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	"For that person who has tender skin with many pores, it is necessary for you to scarify him only once and not more than that, so that the location does not become ulcerated."
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	"And command the phlebotomist to widen the scarification slightly and press down a little, while gently applying suction."
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	"If the blood is thick and coarse, then it is necessary to scarify twice. For in the first scarification, the path for the subtle exit of blood and water is opened."
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	"But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is acquired through scrutiny."
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	"If the blood is very fetid, then it is necessary to perform a third scarification in order to achieve the desired result."
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or just a small amount, one scarification suffices."
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	"And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should perform many scarifications. But if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to perform scarifications with a deep cut."
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	"The term 'scarification' refers only to the depth of the wound made by the lancet."
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	"And if the person has thick, hard, dark skin with narrow pores, then it is necessary to anoint the locations of bloodletting with gentle, opening, resolvent oils. If it is summer time, use oils such as aloe oil, violet oil, or double-dosed melilot oil, or cumin seed oil. But if it is winter time, then use narcissus oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or blood oil for those of a similar nature."
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	"If excess fluid is thick, then use oil of marjoram, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of nettle, and their like."
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	"If the wound is of large pores with tender flesh, then oil should be prohibited, and the places near the wound should have their bandages washed with warm water or hot water of salt, or cold water of sage, or cold water of borago, etc., according to those."
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	"And for one whose blood has great humidity, wash their wounds with sour wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, etc., like those."
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	"And for one whose fluids are thick, wash their wounds with old wine, or water of hyssop (marjoram), or decoction of fennel, or chamomile, etc., like those."
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	"And it is necessary that the bandage be kept before washing; having to be administered near the bath for one or two hours, and having to sleep near the wound."
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	"What is necessary for regulating the bandage of a patient who has been bled before washing."
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	"At the beginning, if the patient or one who needs phlebotomy is choleric and vents over his hot blood and inflammation, then he should take causes of cooling, such as sour apples, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanabin, and julep, etc., like those."
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	"And pause in their foods such as poles, fowl meat, cooked foods with sour sauces, etc., like those."
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	"And for one whose complexion is phlegmatic, it is necessary that he drink hyssop syrup with honey, or hyssop syrup of sesame seeds and sumac, and a middle-aged wine between old and new; and that he be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as poultry, rabbit, partridge, and pigeon."
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	"And it is necessary that on the day of washing and phlebotomy, drinking be greater than eating."
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	"And it is necessary to give some people triaca syrup or musk medicine (musk), or alcelita before washing or phlebotomy or during, so that their main members are comforted and their blood is subtilized; but those with a scrofula should not take it."
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	"But the washings that are not scars are those paused on the liver, and on the spleen and podagra, and on the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the armpit of the arm, for these members do not suffer scarification upon them."
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	"And it is not desired for those except the attraction of blood from a member, such as pausing a wash on the nipple in illness of bleeding of blood from the nose; and they use it so that cold and thickened humors of the member may be dissolved, such as pausing on the belly and navel; for it rarifies the member, scalds it, and relieves pain because it resolves humors."
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	"And it is paused on the temples when accidents occur in their oppression or apoplexy, for by virtue of strong attraction it draws away oppression and expels apoplexy from its place."
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	"And similarly, it does when paused on the liver and spleen to resolve humors enclosed therein."
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	"And these washings are administered solely with suction; some times they are administered with fire."
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	"And sometimes they are administered filled with warm water in illnesses of the spleen."
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	"And this is so that the washing may be full and larger, it should be cold water alone or water in which convenient herbs have been cooked."
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	"Form of washing administered with fire: Let the circumference of its mouth be that of two fingers, as we have formed it; and let the quantity of coals be the most of one handful; and let them be on the side of it, in the place that is in the circle, the most of it, and let the traction be small according to the quantity that enters it like a needle."
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	"Let them be made of red hot coals or citrus, with thick edges, lion's teeth, and smooth for that they not wound the member because of its position upon it."
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	"And let there be in its midst a transverse tongue of iron or of brass, on which is placed a candle with fire."
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	"And let this washing be much larger than that which we have recommended, and the smaller one according to the illnesses and state of he who uses it."
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	"And washings for children and weak ones are different from those for young people and strong ones."
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	"And the quality of pausing this washing with fire on a member is that it extends the hand with fire from decently dried wood before a small candle of wax, and pauses it on the midst of the transverse tongue in the middle place of the washing, so that the fire be kindled around the edge thereof so that not burn the body of the sick person."
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	"And then it is paused on the member of the sick person, and let the thread be upon the traction that we have said, until when we have the washings and do not desire to stretch the thread and that smoke issue forth upon that traction, then the washing will soon dissolve."
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	"And then remove the hand according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary."
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	"But in washing that is administered for the illness of pleurisy with water, there being neither transverse tongue nor traction, and it is not administered until it is filled with water, and is paused on the member alone."
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	"And this is its form: And this washing, the larger it is, the better, for that it can receive a large quantity of water."
Capitol .xcvii.	"Chapter .xcvii."
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	"Bloodlettings are not administered on most members except those where it is impossible to apply washings because of their smallness, such as the eye and gum and like them; or on member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their like."
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	"And the quality of using those bloodlettings is if found sanguissuguas that are in the waters of ditches free from putrefaction."
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	"And then they are laid the day and night in water ditch until they be hungry, and that there remain none in the belly of those, and then let the body be evacuated at the beginning by phlebotomy and washings, and then rub the member of the sick person until it becomes reddened; and then pause them on it."
E cum son umplidas e caso.	"And when they are full and sated."
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	"And if it is possible to suck the place with a washing, it is more expedient in healing."
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	"But if not, then wash the place with vinegar and afterwards with much water; and let it be rubbed and pressed."
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	"And if the body of blood is prolonged near the closing of the sanguissuguas, and it is this that issues forth, then you should insert a cloth moistened in hot water, and pause it on it until the issue be stopped."
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	"And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle upon it powdered vitriol or gallstones and like them of the causes stiptical until the blood be cut off; or pause on the place many of roasted broad beans, and lay them there until the beans adhere to the place, and the blood is cut off."
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	"And it is necessary, if necessary, iteration of sanguissuguas when it is possible to change those."
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	"And if sanguissuguas are prohibited from suspension, then rub the place with fresh blood or put a needle in the places until it issues forth blood; and also pause them there, for those when they feel any blood soon adhere."
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	"When you wish it to stop bleeding, sprinkle on it a bit of powdered aloe, or salt, or ashes."
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Here begins the second part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it concerns the reduction and repositioning of fractured or dislocated bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	But know, my son, that only fools and commoners boast about this chapter, those who have never regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And this is why this method is not practiced among the learned in our land. And yet I have not forgotten it during all these years of my life; and I have not included what follows except for the long study of the books of the Ancients and understanding of them, from which I extracted this science.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And now I direct you to experiments and studies during the length of my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have already described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which I have experimented, since I have summarized it for you here and freed you from the occupation of lengthening it. And I have summarized it at the end of summarizing; and I have demonstrated it at the end of explaining; and I have formed many shapes of instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition to explanation, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections of cases of bone fractures, from which a preliminary explanation is necessary before we begin the reminder of broken limbs and their varieties in each case.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I will say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of my speech; and the chapters for understanding which at the beginning it is necessary to force the artisans and to stay on the truth of them; that is you and those who are prompt that know or learn this noble art other than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when there occurs fracture or dislocation or torsion or casing, it is necessary for you to begin immediately with phlebotomy on him or to let him bleed, or sometimes both, if there are no prohibitions such as debility of virtue, or he is an infant, or very old, or it is a time of intense heat or cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And it should be content with his usual diet of fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit thick meats and filling foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood until you are certain of an abscess cut and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And immediately return the sick to his usual first regimen with which he is accustomed to live.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore when the bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary for the sick to be nourished with nutritious foods that are rich and heavy and viscous, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, heads, feet, bellies of cows, oil, fresh cheese, thick wine and similar ones. And with this regimen coagulation of fracture occurs more easily and quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the bones of young people when they are in their first growth and old men do not have the ability to be united and consolidated according to their nature because of the dryness of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are united and consolidated according to their nature at all times because of the dryness of those limbs, and those that are of them at the end of growth are united and consolidated, such as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But nevertheless nature is able and accustomed to unite over the broken bone of any part without any similar cause such as glutinousness that adheres and strengthens it until they are completely united and fixed together until the end of solidity and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, provided that no cause prohibits this from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to pause the foods of the sick, foods that are heavy and viscous and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Great diversity in fracture according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from that of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from that of the arm; and similarly all the other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I come with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter separately from the others.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Great diversity even within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the species of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arch fracture which occurs in stars, and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: these are called spiral fractures and zigzag fractures and additional ones that do not proceed, such as those that occur when a pen is prepared to write. And there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each species there is a specific pain or torment in its restoration according to what will come later in its own chapter in their places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this reason a bone fracture is recognized by its tortuosity, and the prominence and depression of it to the touch, and that when you grasp it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no apparent tortuosity in the place and it is not done with your touch when you shake the bone and the sick does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there may be tortuosity or a small fissure, so you should not move it with your hand and squeeze it too much. Rather pause on it with the medications of which mention will be made at that moment which are appropriate for the place; and rather apply traction by subtle restriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place where it is arched and not split into two or other than spiral fractures, since all parts of its comparison are removed, then you should begin immediately with the correction of it provided that it suffers from cauterizing abscess.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if it suffers from cauterizing abscess, then leave it alone for a few days until the abscess ceases. And afterwards move it in whatever way you can of elevation and exercise.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration and union of it is more easy than for the bone in which a spiral fracture occurs.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And therefore strengthen it according to what will come later about it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone has spiral fractures, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts if it is the hand or foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be in such a position that you hold the member at the place where it is moved according to its natural figure while the parts of the broken member are extended, then persevere in returning those additions with exercise and movement according to what you can do in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your ability that the sick does not suffer because of your operation of them or injury. And persevere according to your ability in applying one bone to its companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that you touch it at that opportune moment with your hand and if there is any different cause here, correct it and move it according to the quantity of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, as do many foolish doctors who often cause cauterizing abscess because of their operation or cause contraction in the member as we have seen from the operations of many.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	"Then connect, adjust, and perform a proper operation and tightening of that limb, and give rest and tranquility. Instruct the patient about this and make them avoid moving that during their waking hours and sleep, and watch their movement and agitation, and regulate all their movements with full power; and wait until the position of the limb is such that it ensures pain relief, because when they feel discomfort or injury in a certain limb position, then it is necessary to change that position to one where there is no pain. And ensure that the position of that limb is straight and even, so that the limb does not become distorted upon recovery."
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	"And the quality of the tightening of the broken limb is what I recommend. For you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness, and in their form."
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	"And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand, and foot, and similar ones, then the wrapping should be made of very soft cloth."
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	"But those that are large, such as the thigh or calf, require a strong and firm wrapping, because the tight wrapping connects the member strongly on all sides with equal tightening, so that there is no crease in it."
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	"And begin thus: carefully start your wrapping of the limb conveniently over the site of that fracture with three or four wrappings according to what the member requires, and tighten your hand a little with the bandage."
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	"And then continue down to that limb beyond the highest point of the fracture site, and tighten it even more than you did with the wrapping with which you tightened the fracture site."
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	"And then extend your wrapping beyond the fracture site somewhat, and gradually loosen the tightening until you reach a considerable distance from it."
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	"And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken site with wrapping, and continue down beyond the fracture site with wrappings; and your operation should be the same in the tightening of the wrapping and loosening of that according to what we have said concerning the first wrapping above."
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	"And then pause between the wrappings with a piece of wool or cloth with which to straighten out the crookedness of the fracture if there is any crookedness in it; and if not, do not pause in it for any reason."
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	"And then wrap another bandage over it, and also wrap stars decently made of pitch-plaster around these wrappings if there is no inflammation or cauterized ulcer in the site, and otherwise wrap around that which covers the ulcer or inflamed area; and leave it like that for a few days; and then tighten over those star plasters."
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	"And let the stars be made of soft white linen cloth, skillfully formed; or they may be made of pine wood; or branches of palm; and let each star be of this size and shape:"
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	"However, the plaster that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the other plasters, and its length should be according to what the limb is in size and smallness. And then tighten over the plasters with another bandage according to your first tightening; and then tie it above with thread skillfully as we have said concerning tightening, and let your tightening be according to the extent of the fracture site, and the further away from the fracture, the less the tightening."
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	"And the threads should be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people doing when they use threads of twisted thread for tying, it is a great error, because the tightening will not be even."
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	"Also very fine threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to tighten with those what you want, and it is not necessary that there should be less than a finger's breadth between plaster and plaster."
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	"And if the patient feels pain in the extremities of the plasters near the tightening in those places, then remove them with soft wool or carded wool until it no longer hurts him."
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	"Sometimes fracture occurs with luxation, and dislocation occurs in the elbow, as I have mentioned in that chapter concerning singularities."
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	"And know that not every broken limb should be plastered on the first day; the reason for this is that when a limb is large, it does not require plasters to be placed upon it until about five or seven days have passed, according to your certainty of the advent of an inflamed ulcer."
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	"And this is the manner of plasters with which the Ancients used to treat fractures, luxations, and deformities."
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	"Manner of plaster commonly used for the treatment of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not cause heat or friction: take flour powder, which is the bran that remains after grinding grain in a mill."
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	"And sieve it thus as it is with albumin of egg white, and use it without making it too thick or fine."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	"Another manner of plaster for treating fracture, luxation, and deformity: take asafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and mustard seed which is the residue of wild mustard, all of these in equal parts, five drachmas each; myrrh and aloe also five drachmas each; aloes wood twenty drachmas; all are ground and sieved and mixed with aloetic water or egg white if the patient's condition is scabbed. And use this plaster, because it has a good composition and restores lightly broken bones, beneficial for many people."
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	"Another manner of plaster which is beneficial for fracture and deformity: take mustard seed and white wax fifteen drachmas each, myrrh and aloe five drachmas each, acacia six drachmas, pitch twenty drachmas."
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	"All are ground in a mortar with much effort and sieved, and mixed with water or egg white and applied."
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	"Manner of plaster for joints and separated bones in their places, and when pain occurs accidentally in those and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and submerge it in sour wine and cooked oil, and place it on the location."
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	"But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of inflamed ulcer, nor does it properly expel pains."
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	"Another manner of plaster that restores broken bone: take leaves from a fig tree and leaves from wild poppy, count them all together and make plaster of them."
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	"A brief manner of plaster administered for the restoration of broken bone and when you want resolution of the remnant of ulcer: take residues of white wax, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, all in equal parts by weight; grind them all together and mix with wine if the limb is not scabbed."
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	"But if it is scabbed, then use it mixed with wet coriander water or plain water."
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	"Another manner of plaster more powerful in resolution than the first, when a hard ulcer occurs during bone restoration: take residues of white wax and its seed, and of balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts by weight; grind them together and mix with willow water or sweet water or wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the appearance of its color."
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	"Hippocrates does not specify in his book that anything should be placed on the member during its restoration, but rather that a cerote of wax and oil should be made and no other cause recommended; he suggests it should be between thickness and subtlety."
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	"However, in the case of Galen it is seen that something should be placed on the broken member during its restoration and the causes in which there is heat exhaustion with small heat are such as myrrh, frankincense and similar ones to those we have recommended."
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	"Method of plaster that relieves injury and pain: take ground mastic, of cypress, of human hairs shaved or feathers of birds, and of althea, and salt, powdered equally; they should be sifted and sieved and are made into a plaster."
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	"But the quantity according to which the bandage should remain and especially be loosened is that you should consider if there is no pain or pressure nor the bone broken has not moved from its place, then you should not loosen it for many days."
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	"And if there is great pain or pressure or inflammation at that place, then you should cut or loosen it immediately, and remove the plaster from it."
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	"And take a cloth of linen and a marine sponge dampened, and submerge that in warm water, and with it wash the place within until that pressure and pain are relieved; then let the member rest for an hour; then apply over it clean wool immersed in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and tie it on for one night so that you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and that the inflammation of the member is eased, and the pain from it is removed."
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	"And then continue that subtle strapping and small plaster until you have healed completely with your first strapping, subtly."
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	"And if often times the abscess and the heat and the pain and the inflammation and all accidents have been removed from everything, then you should continue that as you did at the beginning, equally."
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	"But if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs to the member, then you should not loosen it except after three or four days or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to what appears to you by the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and joins together with the coagulation of the flesh over it."
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	"And then tighten the strapping more than your first strapping all around, and adjust according to the thickness of the flesh of the sick person, as it has preceded."
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	"But if you see that the place of the fracture is already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then you know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, moisten it with warm water every time you loosen it; do this for all three days; and slightly loosen the strapping, and by this operation, bring nourishment to the member, and it will heal easily."
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	"But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do sometimes when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation, great fear, and if it were right, this would have been enlarged by the Ancients in their books and written with that done."
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	"And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it."
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter according to: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	"There are many species of fractures, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures happen by percussion of a blow, which crushes all the bone inside the head, leaving the bone bare, just as it happens in wood; this species is called depressed. Or the blow cuts into some part of the bone and cuts the flesh of it but does not pass through to the inner side of it; this species of fracture is called elevating absolute."
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	"And the plague of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contusion or abrasion; and the cause of it is percussion with powder or cement on stone, and similar things."
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	"And this fracture is penetrating, which approaches the pericranium that leaves the bone bare; or it is on the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures is great or small."
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	"And this fracture is hidden in the bone, in the small subtlety of the hair, and therefore it is called capillary fracture."
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	"And this fracture happens either by cement or percussion of stone and similar things, which causes some laminas of bone to enter into the inner parts, and it happens in the concavity of the location as it happens with wrenches when they are struck and their entrance enters into the inner parts."
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	"And this mostly happens in moist bone courses, such as those of infants' heads."
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	"And so with all these species of fractures, their parts are separated like stars scattered."
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	"And I have brought this in remembrance of all this in its place."
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	"And you should know all these species of fracture by detection on them and by inquiry about them with tests and odor of rotting flesh that is above them."
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	"And capillary fracture is recognized by this: it is discovered on the bone and wiped off, and then touched with a finger because the fracture appears black."
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	"But in the treatment of fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the sick person. And then if you see by those accidents that it signifies by manifest sign for fear, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, syncope, acute fever, and swelling of the eyes with redness of them, similar to them in great dispositions, without doubt it will not be healed."
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	"And if you see that accidents are not current, then you hope for health. Then begin the treatment of it."
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	"The reason for this is that if the plague has come to you as it was at first and this happens in the days of winter, then you should study the structure of the bone before the fourteenth day according to every disposition."
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	"And if it is in the days of summer, then you should remove the bone on the seventh day, having to ensure that what is left of the bone is corrupted by the pericranium and that the accidents that we have mentioned happen."
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	"And if the fracture has already reached the pericranium covering the brain and is with small parts and abrasion, then you should cut into the comminuted and abraded part, as I will teach you."
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	"And then shave the head of the sick person according to custom and manner as you can according to the figure of the plague, and let it be light on the sick person."
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	"And if it happens to you that you must make the detection of the bone, fluxes of blood or hot abscess, then you should pause on it with what is necessary and use cloths infused in wine and rose oil to make the plague rest until the abscess is sedated and you are sure of the flux of blood. And then begin in the circumcision of the bone and in the ablation of it."
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	"And this should be done according to one of two operative methods."
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	"And the first method is that you should cut into the bone with an incision of such a shape. And then administer another incision knife a little wider than the first one."
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	"And then use the incision knife even more wide than the second one."
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	"You must take various cutting tools with you, among which some are sharper than others. Some are shorter than others and they have sharp points at their ends; they should be made of iron or steel."
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	"And use them with ease in percussion on the cutting tools, so that you do not cut the head and harm him."
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	"And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must perforate around it beforehand before you administer the cutting tools with the non-depth saws."
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	"And these are not called thus but because those do not reach the term of the bone of the testicle near where it is approached by the saw, for at the end of that which is left sharp resembles a small margin or circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone."
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	"And it is convenient that you take many of these saws with you, each one suitable for the thickness of each bone. Thus, you will have at hand all kinds of saws for all types of bones in the brain whose ends are sharp and whose length and width vary according to the thickness of this bone."
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	"And this is the method of three kinds of saws: The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place the saw on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the saw to another location, pause where there is between all tracks equal to the thickness of a hair or about that."
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	"And then incise with the cutting tools between each track of the bone, and make it as subtle as possible at the end of the incision, as we have said before, until you radiate the bone, or with your hand, or with any other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared for that purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps."
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	"And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the cutting tools do not touch any part of the brain."
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	"And then when you have pierced the bone and separated it from the brain if it is connected to it, remove it carefully, scraping and smoothing its roughness with some tool similar to a cutting tool but more blunt and subtle than others."
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	"And if some small bone fragments remain scattered, then remove them easily with whichever tool seems appropriate to you; and afterwards clean the wound with linens and dressings which we have mentioned."
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	"And the other method of operation is easier and farther from fear, which Galen describes as worthy of great praise; and this is his saying: It is necessary for you at the beginning to begin discovering the broken bone from the place where the fracture is most violent and evident, until when you have discovered that part and paused there, you gently place the end of this soft saw on it whose form is as follows:"
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	"And the lenticular part is long and does not cut any tissue, and the sharp part is on both sides in length like this: that the lenticular part fits the brain with its face facing the sharp part of the bone."
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	"And then strike the saw with a small hammer until you have cut all the bone easily as it is turned, and make sure that no panic occurs suddenly in any way, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them, certainly he would be asleep."
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	"Then if any tissue attached to the bone of the skin remains in some places of the bone, cut it off with the end of that lenticular saw and remove it easily, because it is removed without harm or fear."
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and what is cut off or remains on the bone is its rough surface, then it is necessary to scrape that roughness with fine razors which you have prepared in advance in different quantities so that it will be possible for you to apply them in every place where they are most convenient and most suitable according to how you have proceeded in your operation of the broken bone and its shape."
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	"And you should administer in your scraping operation at the beginning the broadest of those razors, and then use progressively the more subtle ones, and do not stop doing so until you have administered the most suitable and the most subtle of all."
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	"But in each of those other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you should use caution according to how you proceed with their correction."
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	"And this is what has not been written by any of those who have studied that art."
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	"Now we have shown in great fractures what others have written."
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	"And if the skin is torn when you smooth out the bone, then you should take cloth according to the size of the wound and submerge it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound; and also take another piece of cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil, and place it gently on the first piece without pressing too hard so as not to compress the brain; and then apply a broad bandage and do not wrap it tightly but only according to the size of the wound alone."
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	"And leave it with this dressing for one or two days until you are sure of cauterization of the wound; and then remove it and apply medications that cause excessive dryness, such as linseed oil and bran flour, powder of frankincense and of aloe, and similar substances."
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	"And you should make these medications into powders that are sprinkled on the wound while they are dry; and generally speaking, apply to it any medication whose property is to cleanse without biting."
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	"And make sure that the wound in your treatment is clean and not foul with grease or other dirt, nor do you allow it to become inflamed; because when it settles on the skin of the brain, it corrupts it and poisons it, and causes a serious illness."
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	"And it happens in the brain of the head when the bone is exposed and even more so when carelessness of it occurs, and blackness appears on its surface; therefore consider now if you have caused any of those accidents that we have mentioned, you would know that they are harmful without doubt."
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	"And if blackness appears only from the medication that has been applied on top, and it is because of the virtue of that medication that causes that blackness, then you should take a portion of honey and three portions of rose oil, and with them moisten a cloth and place it on the head; and then treat it with whatever remedies are appropriate until it heals."
Capitol .iii.	"Chapter III."
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	"On the restoration of the nose when it is broken."
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	"You should know that the nose is not broken except for two parts that are usually elevated together, or one of those sometimes viewed alone, because in it there are two bones; therefore only one of them is cartilaginous and not broken, but you can cause it to become bruised and twisted."
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	"But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into its socket and use your index finger inside to reduce that fracture, using your thumb outside until the nose returns to its natural shape."
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	"And may you do this with ease, but make sure that you do not cause pain for the patient during your operation."
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	"If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it cannot be reached directly, then it should be treated with a probe having a small thickness at its tip."
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	"And if the fracture is on both sides, you must perform this operation."
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	"And if it is not possible to restore him on the first day of the fracture, you should wait for 7 or 8 days until the swelling subsides."
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	"And then insert a strip of cloth into the tip of the nose if the fracture is on one side, or use two gauze pads if it is on both sides, with enough thickness to fill the hollow of the nose."
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	"And some of the old restorers said that gauze should be inserted folded in its edges and changed every day, but this is not visible to me. However, it is necessary that the strip be inserted into a bandage of wool combed with powdered mallow; and then insert the gauze so that the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened."
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	"Sometimes, in place of gauze, a piece of linen cloth soaked in warm water is inserted into the nose. This should be done when there is abundant pus and it is wrapped in a linen cloth. It can also be done even if the fracture of the nose is severe, provided that inspiration is not prohibited."
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	"This procedure may not be necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use gauze instead."
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	"And if another time a boil appears on the nose, plaster it with cerote or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon."
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	"But if no boil appears on the outside, then you should plaster it with flour of mustard and powdered fenugreek mixed with albumen of egg; and press it gently with a linen cloth, without touching the nose in any way."
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you should bind those places and extract them using appropriate instruments; and then stitch up the wound and treat it with something that adheres and consolidates, and use plasters that are appropriate for it."
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	"And if plague occurs inside the nose, then you should treat it with gauze and insert lead cannulae until it is completely healed."
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	"On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated."
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture does not heal well, observe whether the fracture is merely displaced and not broken into two pieces, curved inward at the edges. Then its treatment is lighter.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Then, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth. Similarly, if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the said index finger of the right hand and push gently with it inward at the edges of the fracture using the other hand to keep it from slipping outward.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two pieces, then you must apply traction to both parts according to the proper line until it is possible to achieve reduction.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is displacement of teeth due to fracture, then strengthen those that you expect will break with gold, silver or thread wire. Then place a pad over the broken jawbone and another pad over the folded cloth, and place a large steel plate made especially for this purpose, or a wooden wedge along the length of the jawbone. And tie it on top according to how you have prepared the ligature and what is appropriate for the application, so that it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest quietly, and instruct them not to use suction when eating their food.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the figure is already altered in some way, then on the third day, remove and untie it. And then correct what has been altered of it, and apply plaster with powder of chalk, albumen of egg, or flour of wheat, having first removed the cerate from it, and cover it with linen cloth.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then when the plaster is dry and well-adjusted on it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and strengthened. For often this fracture heals in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer whatever has been said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by inflammation, then consider whether it is due to separation of bone fragments or foreign bodies. If there are foreign bodies, then carefully remove them using whatever is appropriate for removing those instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the inflammation is narrow, then dilate it with the flebotomy probe according to the amount needed.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those foreign bodies and there remains no trace of them, then close the opening of the inflammation if it is wide. And if not, cover it with one of the plasters that are appropriate for this purpose and bandage it until it has healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Very often the clavicle is fractured at its junction in front of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways:
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Either it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without accident; and it is easy to restore it; or it is such that the accident happened in it, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is such that the fracture is with plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without plague, is to have two ministers present: one should hold the assistant and follow the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck towards that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then grasp the fracture with your fingers so that it follows the shape of the second one mentioned earlier, and there is neither prominence nor concavity in it.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you need more extension, then pause by placing a pillow of wool or cloth under the affected shoulder, its size according to your needs. Then extend and elevate the collarbone and press the pillow with your hand while grasping the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the collarbone out to its original position, then have the patient lie on their back and place a folded towel or cloth under their shoulder that is as thick as needed.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister should press on the muscles of the shoulder from outside until the bone of the collarbone is elevated to its original position. Then you can reduce the fracture and grasp it with your fingers as mentioned earlier.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel sharp pains in the collarbone that are disturbing, then press on it and remove those sharp points with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then make an incision on it with one of the scalpels that you have brought for this purpose. You had placed the scalpel on a table or other suitable surface earlier. The scalpel should be made of wood or iron and its shape is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it should resemble a spoon with this concavity. Its width should be according to your needs, depending on the size of the bone or the prominence of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But its length should be as short as possible for the operation; it should have two ends like this: one end is wide and the other is narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the skin that you incised when removing the sharp point from the bone is wide and there is a risk of abscess, then close the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small or you suspect an abscess, then cover the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then soak a cloth in sour wine and rose oil and apply it to the affected area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the tightening of the bone when it is closed and sectioned is that you apply a plaster made of flour ground with egg white, and place it on top of the bone. And also place the bandage around the arm if necessary, and then take some linen cloth which is quite long, about the width of a palm or thereabouts, and fold it twice over the bandage and plaster. Then take a thin board from a table whose width is three fingers and in length likewise; and wrap that in a cloth, and wrap that cloth around the board at the location of the fracture. And also place some linen around it as before, and roll it around the bone and around the arm and hand of the patient, and reduce it evenly on all parts, until the tightening of the fracture is equalized, which is what you are aiming for.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all of this should be done without applying too much pressure on the broken bone. And every day you should examine the patient to see if the bandage has softened or if the board has shifted. If so, then you should correct this and tighten the dressing accordingly.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And also make the patient sleep with their head elevated and place a small cushion on the side of the bed away from them at night. This way, the patient's shoulder will be elevated above the rest of their body and thus the fracture of the collarbone will be lifted by the muscle, or the arm will lie close to the neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the dressing until around twelve days have passed without any sign of inflammation or abscess at the location.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And also renew the plaster if you see that it is becoming loose, and adjust it according to the tightening and restore it. Leave it in place until it has been restored and the fracture of the collarbone has healed.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And the bone is strengthened and healed around twenty-eight days, although in some cases it can take less time than this, especially in strong men.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On the restoration of shoulder fractures.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The blade of the scapula is broken at its lateral end and it is not just the blade that is broken but also its margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	"And when the place is broken - and it is broken in the middle of him - and it is only known by touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture so should be the preparation of him and reduce that according to its natural figure in every manner that you are able."
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	"And also pause over the powder millstone with albumen of egg and stop the lion; and also pause with powdered linen doubled; and also pause over him on the left side of the table subtly according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more."
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	"But if the left side is concave in some of the places of the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with egg stopple, and then place the left side according to equality."
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	"And also stretch above it with a humid cloth with proper constriction and firmness of the left side within that it may not be removed from its place."
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	"And consider the ligature every day; and always whenever it is softened, then on another day stretch it and make the left side equal if it has been removed from its place."
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	"And dress the wound upon its own side."
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	"And the bandage is renewed every 20 days or at most 25."
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	"And then when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the ligature, and be sure that that is of the bones whose union was not impeded nor their dissolution."
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	"And if you proceed from the place of the weight and leave the artery there, then cut upon it, and stay it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the clavicle concerning the drainage of an abscess if it happens here."
Capitol .vii.	"Chapter VII"
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	"On the restoration of a broken foot."
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	"The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of it and this is quite serious, but its ends usually remain intact."
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	"And when the middle of the foot breaks, it happens that it sinks into its parts, causing great pain and difficulty in walking, coughing, and sometimes vomiting blood. And this is evident inside the broken bone and cannot be hidden from sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	"And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on their back and place between the palms of their hands a cushion; they should press lightly on the muscles of the foot, align its bones with those of two other toes, perform the operation carefully and correctly according to every possible manner and what is appropriate for this, until the bone returns to its normal shape."
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	"And then apply a plaster and lint and then place it on a thin board of linen or calico, which you should wrap in cloth. And carefully wrap that around the broken bone so that it is not moved; and sometimes bind it to the back with bandages according to its shape, and tighten it with proper strapping. And check the binding every hour, tightening it when it becomes loose."
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	"And if it becomes necessary to remove that, you must do so with care or pressure, pain, or abscess occurring in the place. Then you should cut and untie that, remove the plaster, and correct whatever happened there according to its manner of cure; and then reapply the plaster, sometimes changing its face; and adjust the strapping until it is healed."
Capitol .viii.	Capítol viii
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	"Chapter VIII: Restoration of the spine when broken."
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	You know that fracture of the ribs occurs only in large spaces that are located on the back, and at the extremities of their ends near the point where it happens it does not cause such injury except by that which is cartilage-like.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And its discovery is not hidden from feeling through its examination with these [tools].
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done in such a way that it aligns the fracture using these tools according to the most possible method, ensuring that it is well aligned where necessary, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning towards its interior ends, then intense pain and piercing occur to the sick person, similar to the piercing that occurs to one who has coughed, and because the bone pierces the pleura; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting a lot of blood; and this is difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Ancients knew about that with many tools.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	"And they say this: whenever pauses are made in the feeding of the sick that causes inflation and windiness, so that the belly is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed outwards."
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	"May we avoid this, so that it does not lightly cause an abscess to form, if it has not already happened; but if it has already happened, then it will help with that."
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	"And some of them say that the wind should be paused and pressed down so that it comes out strongly; but this is similar to reasoning, yet it is feared that the wind will drive the superfluities to the place due to weakness."
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	"And some of them say: the place should be covered with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and powders should be paused between the ribs until it is filled up so that the bandage fits well when wrapped around it according to its roundness; and the illness should be treated with food and medicinal pleurisy cure."
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	"And if the illness causes violent constriction which cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the membrane with a piercing blow, then they fear for the illness. Therefore, it is necessary to open up over the place, uncover the broken rib, and immediately place upon that instrument which preserves the hip joint, the remembrance of which has been preceded, and insert the bone with ease, and remove it."
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	"And also, if the wound is large, we should bring its two lips together with stitches, and treat it with poultices until it is healed."
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	"And if an abscess forms, then quickly take fine powders and mix them with rose oil, place them on the spot, and treat the illness with what is appropriate for the internal abscess."
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	"And let him be propped up on pillows while he sleeps, until he is healed."
Capitol .ix.	"Chapter ix."
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	"On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck."
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	"Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and it is difficult to reduce them; similarly with the vertebrae of the spine."
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	"And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: for if the sinews are already softened, stunned, and deadened, and he cannot move those limbs nor extend nor stretch them nor contract them at all; and when you compress those parts with your fingers or prick them with a needle and there is no pain felt in those parts, then you will know that it will not be healed, and this condition is mortal."
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	"And if those parts are moved and there is felt in them compression with the fingers or pricking with a needle, then you will know that the nape of the bone is saved, and that the illness will recover with treatment."
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	"And if you see a similar condition in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider his pulse."
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	"Then if you find that the sinews are already softened, it is as was said concerning the limbs; and also when he lies on his back, there is shortness of breath and involuntary evacuation of excrement, and sometimes he becomes prostrate on his back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then you will know that it is mortal, and do not bother with treating him."
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	"But if none of these causes occur, then the case is better and easier to treat."
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	"And the treatment for this is to make an incision over the hard abscess which has formed on the displaced vertebra, using rose oil alone or with honey; place some of this mixture upon it several times a day until the hard abscess is softened."
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	"And then apply one of the soothing and stimulating poultices, and compress it with a bandage. And order the patient to rest quietly and not sleep on the painful part until he is healed."
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	"And if a fracture of the bone is suspected or there is some separation from it, then it must be exposed at the neck and that bone reset. And also approximate the two lips of the wound with sutures if it is large; and treat it with some ointment of honey until it is healed."
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	"But if the end of the bone is broken off, and this is the end of the coccyx, then you must insert the little finger of your left hand into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible by means of traction. And then apply a poultice and bandage, if necessary, and compress it."
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	"And if you suspect broken sinews within it, then open that part and extract those bones, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned until it is healed."
Capitol .x.	"Chapter 10"
De restauracio de la ancha.	"On the Reduction of Dislocations"
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the broad hips are broken and if they break then their fracture is nothing but a communion in the extremities of those which are inserted into length and decline towards the inside parts; and it happens to the patient pain in that place and punctuation, and the thigh becomes stunned when it breaks.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And its restoration is that you stretch your hand over that entrance which is above the fracture which is its shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only at the end of it then you will shape that according to what appears equal in shape by shaping an entrance that is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is long or already declines towards the left parts then you will make the patient lie on their stomach entrance that has been prepared for you to restore that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And when you have shaped that then pause on the plaster and also pause on that stick of wood or bone, and stretch by tightening over that which you should not fear punctuation of fracture nor movement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And shape the concavity with that which fills that entrance where that took the tightening according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs then you will cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and pause on that which subdues it according to what has been said above; and also return to the restoration of it, and stretch it thus as is necessary.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if this happens in the bone that is broken or crushed then you will leave them alone.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter xi
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the jawbone.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The jawbone is that which is between the cheek and to the head of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	"If it is broken, then its restoration is by one of two methods: the first being that you take a piece of flat board with moderate thickness in this shape:"
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	"And there are two pieces at both ends, and it is suspended from an elevated place."
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	"And the patient should sit on a chair, and then place their broken arm on the board so that it reaches the middle of its curvature."
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	"And then suspend some weight on top of that, or the assistant stretches it towards its parts, and the doctor sets the fracture with his hands together, so that the fracture returns to its proper position."
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	"And the other method is that the patient lies on their back and suspends their broken arm with a sling, then commands two assistants to each hold one end of the fracture with their hands, and each stretches towards their part."
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	"And if you want to stretch it further, then place another rope over the fracture and another one on top of that, and each assistant stretches towards their part."
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	"And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the rope on the curvature and the other half below the fracture towards the elbow."
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	"And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then place the rope on that location and over the elbow."
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	"And then apply it gently and without difficulty, and as soon as it is applied properly according to what is needed and with good application, then bind it tightly so that it does not happen to have an abscess."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	"But if an abscess forms afterwards, then leave the bandage loose for about seven days, and place a compress of clean lint moistened with hot water and rose oil on it until the abscess subsides, and then bind it tightly."
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	"And the method of binding it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap it with a layer of clean cloth over that; and then adjust the arm in that position, and place his hand covered over the affected muscle."
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	"And then wrap it with cloth and bind it tightly around that support for the arm so that the arm remains in place until some cause prevents the bone from breaking."
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	"And then use splints."
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	"And then place over the fracture that splint which is broader and stronger than the others, and place it between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an addition of three fingers on each side."
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	"And then bind it tightly over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	"And ensure that your bandage is as tight as possible around the location of the fracture."
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	"And when the fracture has healed, then make the bandage looser."
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	"And therefore if you change the situation of the splints and the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its normal position, then do so."
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	"And if you fear an abscess forming, then leave the bandage and splints loose for seven days as we have said."
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	"And also consider the bandage in all cases for three days to ensure that it does not press too hard or cause inflammation, and therefore adjust the bandage accordingly so that food does not reach the limb due to an excess of tightness, and therefore correct everything as we have said."
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	"But if you are in doubt about this, then do not untie the bandage for three days or more."
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	"And let his sleep be on his back and let his hands be on his stomach."
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	"And place a bolster full of wool under the elbow and ensure at all times that neither day nor night the figure of the broken limb is dislocated or the bandage becomes loose or moistened, and therefore adjust everything with your own skill."
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	"And provide the patient's food according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, ensuring that the food is softened at first until he begins to recover his strength, and then make it thicker for him."
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	"As to the custom of the splints and the bedding, they should be tightly bound for forty days, and then they should be untied and bathing should be administered and they should be treated with ointments which will correct them."
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	"And if the fracture is completely healed, then do not untie the bandage and splints for seven days or until two months have passed."
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is composed of two bones called the two "focils"; one of which is small and it lies on the side of the thumb, and the other is large and lies next to the little finger on its outer side.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And sometimes only the larger "focil" is broken, or sometimes only the smaller one, but most often they are both broken at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small "focil" is broken above, then its restoration will be easier and its healing will also be quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when it is broken below, the fracture is bad and difficult to heal.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse still is when both bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small "focil" above, then it is advisable for the physician to perform a simple extension with ease until that part becomes swollen.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large "focil" is broken, then strong extension should be used.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both "focils" are broken at the same time, then you must use strong traction with care.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary that you place the figure of the hand in its proper position during restoration and extension, with the wrist stretched out on a bolster, and let the thumb be on top of all the other fingers, and let the little finger be lower than the others, and let the patient sit on a chair covered with a blanket.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And place a bolster before him at his height or towards his right side so that the patient does not stretch out too much.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And moreover let one assistant extend the arm from below with his hand or with a bandage, and another assistant extend it from above in the same way.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then let the physician swell the bone until he reduces it to the best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if during the fracture reduction you are unsuccessful, then use all your skill to reduce everything back into its proper place.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if during the reduction you find that the elbow is separated and not reduced properly, then use force on it and reset it according to the method which we have mentioned above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with dislocation, I have already dealt with this in another chapter, and therefore take care of it according to that method.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess forms at the beginning of your restoration, then take a cloth smeared with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, which is between specificity and subtlety, and place it on the area with slight pressure until the abscess bursts. Then remove the cerate and apply a plaster prepared from powdered mallow with clear honey, and also apply splints; and let the splint which is placed over that fracture be wide and strong.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that in the case of fractures of the arm there are usually six splints used, or seven if the fracture is in both bones at once.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply your traction with force and vehemence over the area of the fracture, and especially if there is strong tension above or below the fracture site, apply gentle traction beforehand according to what was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	"Let the cloths wrapped around the fracture be soft moistened ones, neither hard nor rough, and let the oil with which it is strained be purely middle-ground between fine and coarse, as we have advised."
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	"And consider the limb and the wound after a few days."
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	"And if any cause arises that necessitates correction, such as swelling in the limb, then you should immerse the limb in cold water until the swelling ceases."
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	"Leave the limb to rest without constraint, and then gradually increase the strapping."
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	"And if the strapping has been softened and the bone has set well enough, then correct everything with your own skill."
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	"Also consider whether nourishment is being hindered from reaching the limb due to excess strapping. If so, you should loosen it slightly and leave it for a few days until nourishment can reach it again, then tighten it."
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	"But if the illness is not affected by any of the causes mentioned above, then it should not be loosened for about twenty days or thereabouts."
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	"And then have the patient hang their arm by its own strength of movement and make them sleep on their back."
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	"Know that this fracture is typically restored in thirty or thirty-two days, but it may also be restored in twenty-eight days. This depends on the disposition of complexions and the dispositions of strength."
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	"On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers."
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	"Know that in the palm of the hand and toes of these people there is often fracture, not just bruising many times seen."
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	"And when the hand has fracture or bruising, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back and have their head hang down level with their chest, and near pause the hand over that extended one."
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	"And then the assistant extends the broken bones, and the physician aligns them together in good alignment."
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	"And then it is necessary to apply plaster and gauze, if there is no cauterization; and then place a splint on top according to the quantity of the location, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth."
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	"But if the fracture is in the palms of the hands inside the belly of the palm, then make a similar splint of cloth, and command the patient to hold that with their hand clenched; then it should be wrapped with long cloth."
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	"And let the splint be of leather, with cloth laced onto it, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and hold it according to what is necessary."
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	"But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, then place splints above and below the affected part of the palm, so that the hand is straight and upright; and then apply the dressing, just as it would be wrapped around the wrist between those parts."
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	"And if there is a fracture of any of the joints of those fingers, then if it is the thumb, align it as necessary and then hold it with the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint on top to elevate the fracture and prevent it from moving."
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	"But if the fracture is in other fingers, such as that of the middle joint, or the index finger, or the ring finger, then align and bind them with the finger that is adjacent to it; or let them all be bound continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on top, just as we said for the thumb."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	"And consider, in your setting and application of the dressing, the position of the abscess, cauterization and counterpressure - according to what is necessary when such a cause occurs, following the narrative described above."
Capitol .xiv.	"Chapter XIV."
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	"On the reduction of fractures of the bone of the leg."
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	"The bone of the leg is often fractured, and it becomes evident to the touch as it turns towards the front of the joint and the pus forms above it."
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	"And its reduction is done as follows: a bandage is applied above the fracture and another below it, and the patient lies on their stomach and face."
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	"And then the practitioner extends all the ligaments to their proper place when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone."
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	"But if it is displaced towards the knee joint, then pull the ligament attached to the tendon of the calf muscle upwards, so that its extension goes upwards and the other bandage below the fracture."
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	"And similarly if the fracture is displaced towards the ankle joint, then pull the ligament attached to the tendo
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	"And then the physician aligns the bone with both hands until it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good union. Then it is necessary to apply a plaster cast and splint if there is no abscess in the limb."
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	"But if there is an abscess present, then wait for a few days until the abscess is resolved by cauterization, and then return to your treatment."
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	"The splinting of it is done as follows: wrap a hard bandage around the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess from it. Then wrap the leg so that it reaches the ankle and knee joint."
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	"And insert a long pin between the leg and the bandage near the ankle joint on both sides, and bring the ends of the pin from above the two parts. Then wrap the excess of the bandage around the leg and foot."
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	"And then place a splint on the leg at the location of that fracture, and also place one on the bone of the shin."
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	"And then fill any spaces between the leg and bandage with soft cloths, so that the structure is stabilized."
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	"And then begin with strong binding in the middle above the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and the more you stretch the bandage at the location of the fracture, the less tight your binding will be and the lighter and softer it will become."
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	"And then extend both ends of the pin outwards on both sides until it reaches the heel of the foot. Then tie both ends of the splints tightly on the other side to ensure that the bandage does not shift from its position."
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	"And then leave the splint on for about three weeks, provided that there is no gangrene, cauterization of the abscess, inflammation or anything similar. But if any such cause occurs, then be careful and remove it immediately, and correct whatever happens right away, as we have said many times."
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	"But if there is a bone spur that presses on the bone and causes pain, then align it as much as possible. And if you cannot do this, then file down the spur and remove it, and treat it with whatever preceded the removal until it heals."
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	"And sometimes this fracture of the leg is strengthened with splints other than those mentioned earlier, as we have described in the case of the arm."
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	"But nevertheless, in the restoration of it in this way, it does not happen that the patient limps. And if it is restored alone, without applying the other leg, then it is necessary for the patient to limp all the time."
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	"And know that the leg is strengthened in about forty days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions."
Capitol .xv.	Capítulo XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	About the restoration of fractures of the ankle joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	"Know that fractures of the ankle joint are rare, but they happen frequently with twisting."
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	"But if it happens that there is a fracture of the ankle joint, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and this is with much or little pain, and everything is judged by sensation."
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	"And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned with these so that it is joined and united as much as possible by means of traction, ease and manufacture."
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	"And then apply a plaster cast and apply a round splint if necessary, and strengthen it above with bandages as needed."
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	"And also consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as abscesses and similar things so that it is prevented from any accident with whatever is appropriate until it heals."
Capitol .xvi.	Capítulo XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	About the restoration of fractures of the leg bone
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	"Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is thick and is called by name the shinbone, and the other is thin and is called the fibula."
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	"And it happens to each of the species of fractures what happens to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm by alignment, and the operation of it is one."
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	"And if both bones are broken at the same time, then the shinbone is crushed at all its parts."
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	"And if only the thinner bone is broken, then the leg is affected anteriorly in its parts."
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	"If the bone is too thick, bypass it and search for other causes that are not immediately apparent."
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	"And apply traction, extension, and ligation of the bones according to that arrangement."
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	"However, cover it if the fracture of the leg has many settings; then traction should be milder and lighter, and you should proceed with caution."
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	"And if there is any cause for operation on the arm, and this happens when you are arranging the bones and completing your entire operation, then you will take pieces of wood from a pile that has been placed nearby, made from palm branches; choose those that are not too thick nor too thin, and their length should be equal to the length of the leg, with one end entering inside the other."
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	"And then wrap it around each bone with two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the lower end of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, so that they are inside the bones."
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	"And then tie the two bones together in three places on both sides and in the middle, because with this structure, the leg is prevented from bending to the left or right side, and thus it remains in good position."
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	"And then place a splint made of wood according to the length of the leg, and place it there so that the bone may preserve its mobility."
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	"This is especially necessary when dealing with fractures, particularly those that are displaced."
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	"And then examine the leg every day and study it carefully to ensure that there is no inflammation or swelling or other similar causes; if any such cause occurs, then you should apply whatever treatment is necessary for its healing."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter xvii."
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	"On fractures of the heel bone and the bones of the foot."
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	"A fracture of the heel bone does not occur frequently; however, fractures of the bones of the foot do occur sometimes; and those of the toes rarely happen, except for dislocations in their joints."
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	"If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones become elevated above each other, then the person will limp with their heel on the ground prepared in this way."
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	"And then place one foot on what is elevated among those bones, press down on them, compress and dislocate them until they return to their proper places."
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	"And then apply an emplaster and bandage it, and place under the belly of the foot a small table with two flat heads on which to rest."
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	"And then stretch that [the leg] downwards with the foot, because you have wrapped it with cloth and other means which are necessary."
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	"And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandages, because you will find the bones set, either joined together, compressed or dislocated, and the operation on them is as follows."
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	"But if some of those bones are compressed, then restore them and dislocate them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers."
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	"And then place the compressed bone on a splint according to the length of the bone, and leave it there for a few days; and then place that foot on this table which I have taught you about, and stretch it downwards."
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	"But if what is compressed among the bones are two or three or more, then place on each finger a splint according to its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and stretch the table towards the lower part of the foot, with one of the flat heads of the table being under the belly of the foot so that it has good retention."
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	"And you should remember not to neglect considering all the causes which I have mentioned to you regarding the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and it is necessary for you to attend to each accident according to what is appropriate."
Capitol .xviii.	"Chapter xviii."
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	"On fractures of the pubic bone, penis bone and clitoris of women and the penile bone of men."
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	"When the pubic bone of a woman is compressed, then perform a cesarean section on her, incline her slightly backwards at the hips, and hold her there."
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	"And then the midwife should push the pubic bone with her hand, and it should be done on the bone as if she were feeling for something; and then the woman should be shaken, and slowly elevate her hips upwards, because all that is forgotten until the front of the pubic bone is before the opening and the compressed bone returns."
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	"And then apply dust on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cloth gently and let her urinate, reduce and return that [the bone] according to the manner in which it was placed at the beginning, and then return her to her first position."
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	"And do this for seven or eight days until it is restored."
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	"And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch it over the wound with a reed cannula; insert all of the bladder into the pubic bone and then insufflate through the cannula with strength until the bladder is inflated inside the pubic bone, because the fracture will return."
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	"And then fill it with cotton and let it rest for some days as we have recommended until it is healed."
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	"And when the penile bone of a man or woman is compressed, then administer in its restoration and stitching that which we have recommended for the hipbone."
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	"And that which is right is not concealed in these fractures nor is it difficult to find, especially for those who have some study and use this my book; because that fracture means to you the greatest arrangement of a straight line in the restoration and stretching of it."
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	"But in the clitoris of a man when it is compressed, take a gourd of squash and place the clitoris inside; then apply over it wrapping with cloth and wrap it up, and let it rest for three or four days until it is healed."
Capitol .xix.	"Chapter xix."
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	"On restoration of fractures of the bones when they are with swelling."
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	"It is convenient for those who suffer fractures with swelling, especially if the bone is large such as the thighbone or shinbone, or similar to that one which you should lance and perform phlebotomy on immediately if the conditions for phlebotomy are present according to what we have said above."
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	"And if the swelling flows with blood, then it is necessary for you to cauterize its retention in that way that you powder over it with hot wax if there is no other cause present."
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	"And then begin restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not delay except in case of an aposteme (abscess)."
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	"But if an abscess forms, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day until the abscess is softened, and do not approach it in the third or fourth day of all because you will cause bad accidents."
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	"But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin openly, then it is necessary for you to reduce that and align it with your hands gently and with little extension."
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	"But if extension is not prepared for you and the reduction of it with your hands and cloths, then reduce it with this instrument; and it is an instrument made of iron, seven or eight digits long and its width according to the quantity of swelling; and for that reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four according to the quantity that is needed for that in the treatment of all kinds of fractures."
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	"Let him be returned, and let there be little force used lest he be doubled under the pressure at that time of operation."
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	"The tip should be sharp and well-shaped; it should rise above its base with the greatest thickness and strength entering into the divisions."
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	"This is how it looks:"
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	"It is called 'labre volentz atelarem' in Greek, meaning a small plate."
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	"Why should the extremity of the hand be elevated above the prominence of the bone?"
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	"And press it back into place with some force."
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	"And then force the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin and does not fit well with the instrument, insert the tip of that bone into the instrument so it has better grip."
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been recommended, then cut it using the appropriate scissors which we have mentioned earlier; or saw it with one of the saws in whichever manner is possible for you."
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	"And finally, rasp away any rough edges and small splinters from the bone that remain."
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	"And when the bone is reduced and the fracture has been properly aligned with minimal pain to the patient, you will know that the bone has returned to its natural position. And then proceed to what you would do for the great benefit of the patient."
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	"When your reduction of the bone is complete, and then immerse a bandage in black stiptic wine, and especially if it is summer time, do not allow any grease or other substance containing oil to remain on the skin, so that no infection may occur afterward."
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	"And also apply bandages at the time of completion of the bone setting, and leave the skin uncovered long enough to insert splints with forceps and use wrappings according to the amount of the dressing."
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	"And be careful that you do not stretch the skin over the fracture, for many times this has been done by foolish physicians, and it has caused great harm to their patients, even death or gangrene or other serious diseases. Therefore, beware of this."
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	"And if your bandage is light and soft, different from the usual bandages used for fractures."
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	"If the dressing is large or bad, and you fear that one of those unfortunate accidents might occur which we have mentioned earlier, and if there is pain in the area, then it is not necessary to use splints. Instead, apply a wrapping of strong cloths in place of bandages and stretch it tightly with them."
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	"And when after one or two days the dressing begins to get wet, and there is some discharge from it, then remove the bandage that you had placed on it with wine, and apply compresses as usual for dressings, such as tetrafarmacon or similar ones."
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	"And it is advisable for you to remove the splints and examine the dressing every morning and evening until the bone has consolidated and healed properly. And also prepare the limb in such a way that the gangrene may flow from it towards its lower parts easily."
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	"If many days have passed and the dressing is not consolidated nor separated from the bone, then you should know that there are some small arteries at work here, for which you must examine the dressing with a probe."
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	"And of those small arteries which are separated and removed, those which cannot be separated nor cause pain or swelling in the limb, pierce them with a needle according to what is possible for you."
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	"And if you find something hot or cold in the dressing, such as gangrene or other kinds of corruption and putrefaction, then you should pause for one day with that which is described in its chapter concerning the cure of this matter."
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	"And in this matter, my speech must be brief and you must perform your task: when the bone is crushed, do not elevate it above the limb like the bones of the foot and hand or those of large limbs. Do not attempt to reduce it nor extract it because many times death has occurred due to this. Leave that alone until it decays naturally, as it will spontaneously in about twenty or thirty days. Then treat the dressing if you can see it, otherwise leave it alone."
Capitol .xx.	"Chapter 20."
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	"Of the treatment of inflammation that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture."
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Broken bones often heal poorly with scarring, especially near joints, affecting the limb's function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	If the fracture is fresh, apply medicines that have astringent properties like aloe and senna. Then examine it, seek its cause, observe its appearance, and apply some or all of these remedies with wine as an adhesive, albumen of egg whites, or vinegar. Apply them on linen over the fracture and bind them tightly.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	"Leave the bandage untouched for several days; then remove it and replace with another until swelling is gone; or apply a lead sheet descendant on it, as lead has property to reduce all that is inflamed in the limbs."
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	"If the swelling has already turned into hard tissue and it is necessary to remove it carefully, then cut through it along the upper part of it and incise the excess and prominence. Then dress it with some compresses until healed."
Capitol .xxi.	Here is the guessed translation:
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	"When a fracture is restored and then the member remains subtle and weak not following its natural course."
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	"When a bone fracture is restored, and then the member remains subtle and weak, not following its natural course, it may happen for several reasons: one of which is the multitude of solution of the ligaments and tissues not being formed correctly; or due to excess tightening of ligaments preventing nourishment from reaching the member; or because of excessive broaching; or due to excessive movement out of its usual time; or due to lack of blood in the patient's body, and weakness."
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	"To treat this, one should feed the patient and make their heart tender so that blood may multiply within them; administer baths; and apply warmth, joy, and comfort to them."
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	"Furthermore, pause should be made upon the member, so that the flesh draws to it much nourishment, or continuous broaching of it with warm water until nourishment returns and the member regains its natural form."
Capitol .xxii.	Capítulo XXII
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	"Regarding the treatment of bones that have healed crookedly and prohibit their correction."
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	"When an injury occurs to a previously restored member during its healing process due to crookedness and prominence of the bone broken and knotted, and it becomes inflamed in that form, but still retains its natural operation, you should not accept the claim that the member has been recently re-broken."
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	"And yet there are many foolish physicians and healers who have done this in our land, and this operation is greatly to be condemned, leading to great fear of the signal which proves fatal."
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	"But if limpness and knotting are recent, then they should be fomented with hot water containing herbs which have a softening effect, such as mallows, rose hips, marshmallow root, and similar ones; and poultices should be applied using mollifying plasters made in this way or using mucilage of mallow root mixed with grease of goose or oil of camomile, and plastered on; or else figs fried in fat should be trussed with feathers of pigeons, and such like medications which are named 'softeners'."
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	"And sometimes they are dissolved with continuous gentle friction using the most humid ones, and motion of the member should be administered in all parts at all hours."
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	"But if the tortuosity has already appeared and is strong and hardened into bone, and there is a need for cure of it with iron, then it is necessary to cut as much of the excess as possible and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and what is superfluous in the nodosity of that member should be excised with fine scissors, and ease should be given to that with solicitude and care."
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints of the limb, causing prohibition of movement and distortion of the figure of the member, and bringing about great pain and injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore when dislocation occurs, it is necessary to promptly endeavor that it be reduced, and not delay its reduction, for if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and hardened, making the reduction of dislocation difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason it is not necessary to move or stretch the joint at the time of inflammation, for often this brings about spasm and severe pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, it is necessary that you apply the phlebotomy of the disease, and immediately let the inflammation subside; and then the member should be embrocated with hot water and oil, and then reduced gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every limb should be treated with that which brought about its dislocation in the first place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was said earlier about fracture, from the most superior part of the body down to the most inferior.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	"Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the jaw."
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	"If both jaws are dislocated and not aligned; the dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their positions due to minor movement and become softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, with the joint being relaxed at the point of separation such that saliva flows from the patient's mouth and they cannot close it or speak, with their tongue wrapped inside their cheek."
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	"However, when the dislocation is slight, he returns to his usual position on his own without any cause."
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	"But if the dislocation is complete and full, it must be gently reduced immediately, and not delayed at all."
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And the physician should hold the patient's head, and insert his index finger into the depression of the dislocation on one side inside the mouth if it is only on that side; or he should insert both his thumbs together if it is on both sides, with the other fingers placed outside to steady him; and he commands the patient to close their jaws and keep them still; and the physician gently replaces the jaw and presses it until it returns to its proper position."
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	"And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered until it becomes easy to reduce them both without delay."
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	"And once they have returned and are engaged, if the patient's mouth remains closed and not softened, then apply a plaster with powdered lint mixed with wax and rose oil; let it be made of wax and beaten egg white; and apply it with ease using linen cloths."
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	"And let the patient sleep on their back with their head supported between two pillows so that they do not move their head to the right or left; and do not force them to eat anything until after the pain has subsided and the jaws are healed, then let them eat what they want."
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	"And this should be administered with ease, and not force the opening of the mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is healed."
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	"And if the reduction of two jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and not returned to their proper places at any time, then often bloodletting and frequent sudorifics are administered, and sometimes vomiting is induced by drinking a purgative."
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	"And when you do this, know that it is harmful; and often the person to whom this happens dies within ten days."
Capitol .xxv.	"Chapter .25"
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	"The clavicle is not dislocated inward because it is connected to the chest bone; however, sometimes it can be dislocated outward, which can be felt."
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	"And the reduction of this is that the patient should lie on their back and extend their arms."
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	Then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, for it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then pause on that plaster and powders and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	If the end of that which seizes the cord continues with it without being dislocated on any day, then it is necessary to reduce and wrap it according to what we have said and according to what appears to you.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	Then pause on that plaster, powders, and bandage, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this same treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle can be dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the parting of the chest and the parting of the joints.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and that is rarely done; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And more often it is dislocated and exits outwards at the parts of the joints near the chest, especially in those whose flesh is scarce, it is easily dislocated; but in those with much flesh, it exits outwards with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And sometimes a severe blow or fall happens to some men, and the muscle becomes inflamed with an incurable inflammation, and it is injured in such a way that it has already become dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore you should first examine him thoroughly about it, and then proceed with its treatment.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is known when it is at the parts near the chest. Therefore you should distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the intact one, because you will find a clear difference between them. And you will find concavity in the head of the muscle towards the chest, like a hollow, and in the sick person, they cannot bring their hand to their ear, nor can they move it with any movement.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated towards the foot or upwards, you should then find a clear touch and not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	When this dislocation occurs, it can be easily reduced if it's fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	To reduce it, the minister raises the patient's hand above their head; then quickly pushes down on their shoulders to bring them back into place, using force if necessary. The minister then raises their own hand and extends it over theirs as they return gently to their original position.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if it does not return with this method, and several days have passed since the dislocation occurred, then the patient should be bathed in hot water and given a plaster to soften and smooth the area, made from ingredients such as boiled comfrey leaves, flaxseed, and milk of almonds.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then the patient should be propped up on their back and held firmly in place with their arms elevated slightly higher than their head. The doctor places their foot on the patient's sternum, lifts the detached muscle head with force, and pulls the patient's arm towards them to prevent it from being pulled out of place again. Another assistant should hold the patient's head to keep it steady while this is done.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Alternatively, you can reduce the dislocation using this method: Have someone present who is taller than the patient and stand on the same side as the dislocated shoulder. Insert their muscle behind the patient's clavicle and lift it up to its proper position while the patient is suspended in mid-air. Another assistant should pull the patient's arm away from their stomach to prevent it from moving out of place again.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lighter, then another cause should be suspended alongside them, so that they may be weighted down, as this helps to prevent the dislocation from returning.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it can also be reduced in this way: Have a long pole with a round, mortar-like head placed on the ground. Have the patient sit on top of it with their back to the pole, then have them lean forward and extend their arms out to the side, using their healthy arm for support. Then, with force, they should straighten up and extend their torso towards the other side. The joint will quickly return to its proper place.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if reduction of the dislocation proves difficult despite all the methods mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a pole that is two spans long and four fingers wide. Hollow out its thickness according to this pattern:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	"Then also place lion's head cloths on top of the patient to prevent them from moving."
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	"Then place your hand on the patient's chest, extend it over their body towards their sides, and lie the body down on the helper and your arm and hand."
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	"Then place the arm on a step stool according to its width, extend your hand towards the patient's sides, and hang the other side from the other side because the joint is close."
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	"And when the patient's treatment is complete according to your best ability, then place on their chest a lanolin compress of equal quantity; also apply a plaster prepared from ground millet and egg whites over all the muscles, such that it covers them completely; and then bind the compress in place with a suitable bandage. The limb should be wrapped around the plaster, and the patient's hand should be attached to their neck, and left in this position for nine days without moving."
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	"And it is necessary that the patient's diet be restricted while the limb is being cared for, because it is easier for healing to occur when the member is lighter."
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	"And then increase the patient's diet after seven or eight days and encourage movement; but if it is still not firm and flexible, then it has not yet healed."
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	"But if the joint is often dislocated due to excessive moisture or for some other reason, then cauterization must be performed on that spot with three incisions, as previously described in the chapter on cautery."
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	"And even if all of this is done and after seven days the limb is released but the joint is still not firm, and the plaster and bandage are reduced several times without it becoming firm or being able to raise that arm above its proper position, then know that the nerves of that muscle which extend to its head have been cut, stretched or softened. And know that the joint will never be properly fixed in place."
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	"For reducing the dislocation of that shoulder which occurs at the pit or nipple or behind the back, reduction is performed by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns to its proper position."
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	"And then apply the other bandage there and treat it until it is healed."
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	"If the condition worsens and there is delay in limb movement, then the patient should use many warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its initial state."
Capitol .xxvii.	Here's the translation of Chapter XXVII from "The Decameron" by Giovanni Boccaccio:
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip."
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	"You should know that the joint of the hip is dislocated with difficulty and returns to its place with difficulty; and that one which has been dislocated in all directions is more difficultly reduced than one which has only been dislocated forwards or backwards, and the dislocation is not hidden from your view when it is either prominent or depressed according to whatever figure it may be dislocated in, but when you have replaced the dislocated hip joint into its place, this is clearly indicated to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the thigh nor touch with that muscle."
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	"And if you do not reduce it and the dislocation comes to be followed by suppuration, then reduction becomes difficult and cure is altogether uncertain; and especially when it has been displaced backwards, for this is the worst of all species of dislocation and causes the greatest pain, and many times death ensues from it."
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	"And the method of reducing it when possible is to extend the limb with two persons and expand the arm, place one's hands on the joint and push it back into its place with the palms of both hands together or with the edge of the palm turned inwards."
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	"But if it is dislocated forwards, then the limb should be brought back in this way: bending the arm at the elbow with the hand on the chest, strike the joint with the edge of the palm."
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	"And if reduction is not accomplished by gentle pressure, then apply violent traction and much force."
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	"And two persons should extend the arm, and hold it firmly in that position with both hands so that it is not removed during traction."
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	"And then rotate the arm outwards entirely, for a length of folded bandage or linen is wrapped about its hand."
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil that may facilitate its lubrication and aid in reduction; and then press the joint violently with both hands until it returns."
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	"And after the reduction has been made, it should be kept in place by strapping it up with adhesive plaster and bandages, with a suspension sling made of soft cloth attached to the neck, and it should be allowed to rest for several days."
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	"And then if the joint is formed in its proper place, untie the bandages from it and let it rest."
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	"But if the joint is not strong enough, renew the adhesive plaster and bandages, and let them remain for a few days until strength returns; then remove them."
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	"But if severe pain occurs during the reduction of the joint and the limb is in motion, then apply a warm bath and gentle friction and compression until relieved. Or place over the joint an alleviating poultice, especially one composed of linseed oil; and then bind it up gently and leave it on overnight and during the day."
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	"And then remove the poultice and put the limb in a bath; and when it is warm, gently rub the joint with friction and apply the alleviating poultice again, which is a linseed oil plaster, once on the first day, twice on the second day, and three times on the third day."
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	"and repeat this process while bathing until it is healed."
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	"And if desired, apply to the joint a wet poultice made from crushed cabbage leaves bordered with soft cloth and compress it gently. Do this several times until the poultice is dry and the inflammation has subsided."
Capitol .xxviii.	"Chapter XXVIII."
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of the malleolus, that is of the joint between the wrist and the hand."
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	"Dislocation of the malleolus occurs sometimes when the hand is injured; and its reduction is easy, unlike that of other joints. But care should be taken to reduce it promptly before inflammation develops or an abscess forms."
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	"And the reduction of this dislocation is accomplished by placing the patient's hand on a table with the palm facing down, and then the assistant extends the fingers while the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and presses it until it returns to its proper position."
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	"But it is important to note that if the palm of the hand is already on the stomach side of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is on the ulnar side, then the position of the hand should be with the palm facing downwards on the table, so that the physician's hand can cover the prominence of the joint."
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	"And then if it returns quickly, well and good. But if not, compress the joint with adhesive plaster to prevent inflammation and let it rest. And do not repeat this procedure more than necessary, because if it is not reduced promptly within several days, it will become difficult to treat."
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	"But the joint may remain stiff due to its tortuosity; and do not inform the patient of this, but tell him that his hand is paralyzed and he cannot move it for some reason. Then you should know that the nerves are compressed or cut, and then you should treat it by cauterizing around the opening of the joint and applying heat afterwards."
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	"So when dislocation has been reduced, then apply the plaster which we have recommended, and let it remain for five days. Then remove it and let the hand rest for several more days before beginning to exercise it."
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	"But if there is still some restriction of motion and pain occurs in the joint, then apply a cold compress and gentle friction several times until it is relieved."
Capitol .xxix.	"Chapter XXIX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers."
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	"Sometimes the fingers are completely dislocated at their bases."
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	"And when one of the fingers is dislocated on its dorsal or palmar side, then extend the finger and press the dislocation back into place with your thumbs until it returns."
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	"And then support the head of the finger, suspend that finger downwards at the side where it is dislocated, and let it remain for two days."
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	"And then suspend it and extend it until the finger is straight on its own accord within that day."
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	"And when night comes, bind the finger according to this description and do not cease stretching it during the day and exercising with motion. And bind it at night for several days until it is straight."
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	"And do the same if a finger is dislocated on its palmar side. Bind it to that position and perform your first operation until it is healed."
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	"And do likewise when it is dislocated at other joints."
Capitol .xxx.	"Chapter XXX."
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	"Of the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae."
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	"When complete dislocation occurs at one of the vertebrae of the spine or neck, and several vertebrae are displaced from their proper places, then there is no treatment for it, because death usually ensues in such cases."
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	"And the sign of this is that the evacuation of the patient's bowels is involuntary and he cannot retain it. And many times some of his limbs or both sides of his body or both arms are paralyzed, or one of them; or one vertebra is displaced from its proper place, because many times displacement occurs in four directions."
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	"Therefore, this condition is already displaced towards the back and is called 'gelbozitat' [spasmodic torticollis]."
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	"But the treatment of it is that you should first consider whether the condition occurs in childhood. For if it does, there can be neither cure nor recovery from it."
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	"Yet in that which comes through sneezing or percussion or similar to those, the Ancients already spoke of various ways of cure with prolonged speech; yet this has been abbreviated from that which excuses little for its excess, due to my proximity to my intended exposition, with which I have explained and formed diverse instruments to show and explain this."
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	"I say that ingelbosis that occurs from the departure before in the chest is neither good nor cure of that one; and similarly to those that are done on both sides."
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	"And only that which happens properly on the back is cured by it, which I count."
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	"And that the illness be extended over its face, over the cheek near to the wall, and be extended far from the wet instrument so that the chest is not struck by it."
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	"And properly a straight staff should be placed, fixed in the earth at the end of the elbow around the head of him, and another staff should be placed in front of his feet at the other end of the elbow."
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	"And let the minister hold the staff, and not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other according to that form."
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly wrap around the head of the sick person and remove from his temples the linen bandages and tie it; and extend the end of the bandage to the staff which is above the head of him, and tie that to it; and properly stretch the other bandage over his buttocks on both sides of him, and above his calves; and properly adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other staff which is above his feet."
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	"And properly each minister extend the bandage at the beginning of the staff, and let not the two staffs and the bandages be removed from their places where they are fixed, but nevertheless not tied as we have said."
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	"And the physician place his palms on the spine with strength between that it returns, or that he places upon that one table, and properly adjust his feet upon the table between that it returns."
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	"But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three brassas, and dig in the wall which we have said is near to the sick person a place in which the end of the table can be inserted."
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	"And properly place the middle of the table on the spine, and the physician place his feet on the other end, and stretch well between that the spine is compressed and returns to its place."
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	"And if you wish, turn the twist which is revolved with the hand; and if you lie on the ground near the head of the sick person behind the elbow of two staffs, the length of which is one bras, and behind the head of him in the same way two staffs; and let the distance between each staff be a palm, and already it is made in each staff drawn in which turn turns, and each be well fixed on the ground so that it is not moved."
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	"And let there also be one round staff upon which the twist is made, and let it be revolved in the two holes of the two staffs."
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	"And at the end of it there is a hole in which the staff is formed, the length of which is a palm with that which is revolved; and in the two other staffs there is the same as that."
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	"And properly stretch the bandages which you have stretched on the feet of the sick person in the hole which is above his head, and the bandages which you have stretched on his sides in the turn which is above his feet."
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	"And properly over each turn let there be one minister who turns the turn with his hand, and the physician compresses the spine as we have said."
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	"And this is the form of the turn:"
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	"And after the spine has returned, and the place is covered, then it is necessary to apply an empyastic plaster with egg white, and then cotton; and then place a table over the plaster whose width is about three fingers or environ these, and its length is as much as the place of the swelling, and on the parting of the spine so."
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	"And then let it be bound with linen which we have spoken about, and use the subtle nourishing medicine within until it is healed."
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	"And if there is some prominence in the place at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and cleanse with administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and already a lead plate has been administered in that place."
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	"And sometimes prominence occurs in the last of the spines of the back, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already protrudes does not need to be pushed with this medicine, for otherwise you will cause your own death."
Capitol .xxxi.	"Chapter XXXI."
De curacio de anca dislocada.	"Of the treatment of a dislocated hip."
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	"You should know that the junction of the hip and the junction of the muscle do not ordinarily endure except in dislocation, and it does not occur at those parts which occur at other joints with small movement and concavity."
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	"And the junction of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated either inwardly or outwardly, or anteriorly or posteriorly."
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	"More often it is dislocated inwardly, and less so anteriorly or posteriorly."
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	"And the sign of dislocation towards the inside is that when you press the healthy hip against the diseased one, it feels longer and its prominence increases more than on the healthy side, and the diseased leg cannot be bent at the knee, and this is the place where one usually expects an abscess to form after cautery, because the head of the matter has already come here."
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	"And the sign of that one who experiences dislocation outwardly is that his symptoms are opposite to those of this condition."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	"And the sign of that one who experiences dislocation anteriorly is that he stretches his leg completely but cannot bend it without pain at the prominence, and if he tries to walk, he cannot move forward at all; and his urine is retained and his swelling is abscess-like, and he walks with a limp on his heel."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	"And the sign of that one who experiences dislocation posteriorly is that he cannot extend his leg nor can he bend it anteriorly any more than he can bend his knee, and his leg feels shorter than the other one, and his swelling is softened, and the head of the matter is towards that place."
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	"However, the reduction of the types of this dislocation is that you should consider at first whether the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already happened long ago before your arrival. Then you should perform reduction according to his condition, but not in such a way as to be complete; for there is no need for great effort in this kind of treatment."
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	"However, in that one whose dislocation is recent and belongs to the four types of dislocation, then you should have recourse to this: return the junction and stretch it towards the inside and towards the outside, bringing the leg back to the right and left sides, for strong pressure will suffice and there is no need for further treatment."
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	"But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare strong leverage and stretch the leg as far outwards as possible, or use his hands to do so, or use a rope which is tied above the prominence of the thigh; and another assistant should extend one hand over the diseased side so that he places his fingers behind the buttocks. Then press strongly with a linen cloth on the head of the matter and have another assistant hold the end of the cloth."
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	"And let the extension be to the angle between the thigh and the shinbone, or from the inner side of the thigh to the angle of the shoulder-blade, or from behind to the hip."
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	"And let all these be done at once while the patient is elevated with his body lying on the ground and remains suspended."
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	"This type of extension applies to all four types."
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	"And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary for each type to perform its own specific treatment."
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	"In the reduction of this proper dislocation, when it occurs on the inner side, let the patient be propped up on his left side. Then wrap cloths around the head of the matter at that place which lies between the head and the area behind the knee. Then extend the cloth upwards from the angle of the thigh to the highest point of the shoulder-blade."
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	"And then let another assistant strongly grasp the patient's arms and gently move the large part of the diseased matter towards the outside with violent extension, for it will return to its place."
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	"This type is easier to treat than the other types in reducing this member."
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	"But if it is excruciating for you and does not obey this type of treatment, then both feet of the patient should be tied together with a strong, light linen cloth around the ankles and knees."
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	"And let each foot be tied with a rope about four spans in length, and let the diseased leg be stretched out more than the other by two fingers' breadth."
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	"And then let the patient be suspended head-downwards from the top of a pillar so that he is in the middle; and let his length from the ground be about two cubits."
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	"And then command a strong youth to press the head of the matter and another youth to suspend himself along with the patient. Then let the other youth pull the matter forcefully with his hands, for the junction will return to its place quickly."
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	"But in the proper reduction when it is a dislocation on the outside, let the patient lie on his back according to what we have recommended previously in cases of stiffness. Then press the cloth on the diseased leg properly and on its foot."
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	"And then two pillars should be placed, one at the foot of the leg and the other at its head. Then another pillar should be placed in the middle on which damp cloths are wrapped so that the patient is not harmed by the friction between his thighs."
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	"And then each assistant should extend to their respective sides, and the physician with his hand shall guide the reduction according to the art."
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	"Therefore, if it obeys quickly, that is good. But if not, pause over that diligently and treat it in the same way as we have said for stiffness."
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	"But let the patient lie on his left side quietly."
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	"And when the dislocation is on the front side of the thigh, then let it be extended gently. And this method applies particularly to cases on the hip. Then the physician places his right palm over the diseased knee and holds it with his other hand and with that grip extends it from the inside towards the buttock."
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	"And if the dislocation is on the back side of the thigh, then it should not be extended from the inside outwards. Rather, let it be elevated off the ground and placed on a hard surface, just as we have described for setting the ankle bone when the ankle joint is dislocated externally."
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	"There should be administered compression with a board over the location where the joint is."
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	"And once the reduction is completed as needed, you know that the sign of having successfully reduced it is when you extend the patient's legs and when they raise their leg, the limb should return to its place without any difficulty. Then you apply two compresses and bind them with a bandage so that the limb is not moved in any way; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days."
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	"Remove the bandages and compresses, then compare one leg to the other."
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	"Now, if you see those symptoms in their entirety, you will know that the dislocation is fixed, and then let the patient go."
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	"If you see any signs of inflammation, then return and compress that again, extending it according to your first traction method, and leave it for three days."
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	"And then remove the bandage, and have the patient walk around slowly for a few days until they are comfortable."
Capitol .xxxii.	"Chapter .xxxii."
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	"On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw."
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The dislocation is of three kinds: for it is displaced at the outer parts, and at the inner parts, and at the parts above more than at the parts behind; but it is not displaced at the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of dislocation is that when you tell the patient to press their leg against the couch, they know that their hip is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the reduction of all kinds is done thus: Make the patient lie on their right side so that they can extend their leg if possible; bring your left foot forward and place it between theirs; press your left hand onto the front of their hip bone, grasping it firmly with both hands, then lift up sharply while another servant presses down on the patient's leg behind you to help return it to its proper position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The sign of reduction is that their leg adheres to the couch without pain or difficulty when they lift it up.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	Then plaster is applied and the leg is immobilized against the couch; then it should be bound up with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbound.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And the patient should not use their limb for walking for some days until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of it is impossible for you, then apply strong extension with ligatures as in the previous narration on the treatment of hip dislocation.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter XXXIII
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the Treatment of Ankle Dislocation
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle sometimes gets dislocated by a slight sprain, and sometimes it becomes completely dislocated; the dislocation may occur either on the inner or outer side.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	The sign of ankle dislocation is that the area around the displaced talus appears swollen and inflamed.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment for a sprained ankle is easy reduction; it should be extended gently with the hands and pressed inwards until it returns to its normal position.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of a completely dislocated ankle, it is necessary that you make the patient lie down on their back; then have another strong and brave servant hold firmly behind them at the middle of the ankle.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	Then you should place your right hand under the upper part of their foot and your left hand on the outer side of the foot at the location of the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand and push it two times with your left hand, then extend it with your left hand; then press firmly downwards on the heel of the foot with your right hand without shaking.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And repeat this process twice as we have described.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	Then press the heel of the foot down to the ankle for the third time and you will be at the heel.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if it returns again or twice after this manner, and if the foot swells, it is good; otherwise, then the operation is repeated, for that returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	If it is forbidden for you to reduce the hernia with what we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their side on the ground, and stretch a rope firmly tied to the ground between their thighs, and you have wrapped around them a cloth so that the patient does not slip.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister of the testicles holds his own parts, and another minister extends the patient's leg with their hands or with some device placed on the knee; and each minister stretches out their part as much as they can, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides due to their extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the physician reduces the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy side on the outside, for the dislocation returns easily.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And therefore when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you that the reduction has failed, then apply an emollient plaster and bind it firmly with bandages, and tie the leg with bandages to the bed.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And be careful or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel, for the bandage over it should not be tight and harm them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave him like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes moistened, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then untie him on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is necessary for him to walk during that period, it is not certain that the dislocation will not dissolve and be corrupted, and therefore he would not receive any cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess appears from the wound, then you should apply in the cavity of it what is mentioned above in another place regarding cure and dressing, until it is removed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that he who has been dislocated be reduced with little extension without struggle; and what is not difficult, let it be done gently.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some of the toes of the foot, then you should have the patient place his foot on the ground or on a table and stand up like he is walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on one foot, and place your foot over what you imagine is the prominence of the joints, and press it down with your foot with force until it returns, and see that it has been reduced and that there is no prominence appearing in the location.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place below the belly of the foot of him a table that takes all the foot, with two ends, and press it down with proper and firm strapping for three days; and then untie it and let him rest from walking for more days until it is strengthened and the reduction is ensured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	"Of the types of dislocation that occur with plague or fracture or in combination."
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	"When some cause of those occurs, and you attempt the cure of it and the restoration of that, many times death ensues."
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	"And therefore it is not necessary to presume about the cure of that, but only he who is skilled in the art, with long experience, merciful and compassionate, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and let him use remedies at the beginning that are limited to drawing out the apostumes alone, leaving the patient to divine judgment, rather than hoping for health from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, and where there is some hope."
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	"And therefore strive immediately to reduce it at the beginning of the cause before an abscess forms."
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	"And then if the limb returns according to our desire, we should immediately administer treatment that draws out the abscess and heals the plague with what is appropriate for it of the drying medicines."
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	"And if dislocation occurs with fracture and the bones are separated, then you should attempt the reduction of them, and do in that what we have said concerning the simple diseases of those parts that preceded."
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	"And guard and avoid according to your ability that which enters through the paths of fear according to what has been preceded by my instruction; for this is better for you, as you owe it to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and healthier for your true body in your time."
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	"So endeth the words of Albucasis, from which God grant blessing."
Amen.	"Amen."
