O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the culmination of the knowledge of medicine along with its practice, and I have brought it to an end through its explanations and clarifications. And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is lost in our region and has become foreign to everyone, thus the knowledge has perished and disappeared, and there remains nothing of it except for the small descriptions in the books of the ancients which the hands have moved. And from this come errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off, and knowledge is made distant.
Or it seems to me that I want to bring this treatise to life according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation. And I will also discuss the forms of the irons for cauterization and other tools used in the work with the adjustment of the declaration and their preparation as needed.
And because in our time no good master of hands can be found, the art of medicine is abandoned. And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to be knowledgeable in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of them, and their movement and resting, and the place from which they issue. ‌
And because Ipocras said that the name with the name is much, and with the work it is little; and likewise in the art of surgery.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that if one is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, he should guard himself against falling into error and harming men;
just as I have seen many times with those who dabble in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
For I saw a foolish physician who cut into an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; causing so much blood to flow out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another physician who extracted a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large; and carried away with it a piece of the eyeball, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to remove it, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one cut him, he would die.
And I saw another physician who undertook to treat a Duke of our land whose leg was broken, and with the fracture he had an open wound;
and the physician, full of ignorance, pulled on the fracture over the wound with forceps, and left no salve at all on the wound, and left it thus for one term.
And he ordered him not to dislocate it at all.
And so it remained until the leg was completely swollen and the foot became gangrenous.
I was called to come to him and hurried to come and dislocate the leg; And when I heard it had been dislocated, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But nevertheless, the corruption had already taken hold in the limb, and could not be healed;
And the corruption did not stop spreading through the limb until the whole limb was lost.
And I saw another physician who opened an encysted abscess and then inflamed it through the malevolence of his practice.
For chancre, when it is purged of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corruption can be entirely removed.
And therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: That is to say, works where there is danger in many ways; abei li oevres que nus ne pued faire sanz peril. Et por ceu est li mestiers asses prou et difficiles.
And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Therefore, you must be careful so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you.
So take up your arms in confidence, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to safety and be praised;
And leave the dreadful diseases to those who have great knowledge.
And remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may pass from this world to the other with glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: Ne take not in charge bad illness, lest you be called foolish physician.
"I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and also about medical cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet.
And of the shapes of the instruments, and of the tools for cauterization, and of all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is also about cutting and boring, and about cupping and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
And this chapter is organized according to the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
and is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the shapes of the instruments.
As we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak about the quality of each temperament and its harmfulness.
I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest speech and most subtle knowledge and secret answers.
and many wise men have spoken of this and agreed upon it;
but I am not satisfied with their words, for I fear verbosity.
I say that cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is material, except for two complexions: that is to say, hot complexion without material and dry complexion without material.
In hot and dry complexions together with material, some have discussed and said that cautery is great help there; And others say the opposite: That cautery is not good for diseases caused by heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured with heat or dryness;
And those who say the opposite claim that cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that occur in the human body. Because when you examine the man's body and its moisture according to the fire complexion, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it so by experience.
And yet, do not interfere with it except for those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and duration of time;
we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the physicians gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
And know, son, that cautery with fire is among the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than cautery with burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not extend beyond the member that it burns, and does no harm to any other member if possible.
The burning medicines come from one member to another, spreading, and cause disease with serious healing in the affected member. And by chance kill the patient.
The fire, because of its high intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is an excess.
And this I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it was based on the truth of things.
And for this reason I apologize for the length of my speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives diseases from the body, as the philosophers say, demonstrating. Or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed upon the time when the cauteries should be made, and chose patients.
And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm that occurs is remedied by the aid of cauterization. And also if the cauterization is necessary for urgent and pressing pains, which cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And do not think of it, dear son, as foolish doctors do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization does not recur; and they say it thus; 》
and they say it thus; 》 but it is not as they believe, because cauterization is nothing more than a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and it is more effective than other medicines due to its quick action, and the power of its work and authority.
And it is possible for the illness to come sometimes according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the illness and its power;
and the superfluous elements are gathered in him by the consumption of food and similar things, except for cauteries applied to a place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as tooth cauterization for pain, and similar things, and this kind of pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
but they do not believe that cautery is worthwhile after medicine, but their belief is false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer remedies in some illness and they are not effective, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;
and they said that cauteries of gold are more effective than those of iron, as they have declared. And yet when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
and if it is heated too much; They do at the fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Now I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet, so that it may be easier to find.
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and it has two effects: it is done because of an illness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, due to excessive dreams and toothache and throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a cleansing medicine, changing the head (i.e., making it wet) for III or IV nights, according to what the virtue and nature and custom of the patient can bear; then make the head of the patient dry again.
Then have him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on a soft cushion;
after that, place the root of your palm at the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two fingers meet, make it bleed first. Then warm the cautery called "olive," for this is its form: And put it on the spot with a stamped ink mark, and make as you descend and press your hand little by little in turn. then immediately lift your hand, and return to the spot if you see a bone appear a little. and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
afterwards take a small amount of silk, and put inside it soft cotton, and place on the spot, and leave it there for three days;
afterwards place a moistened cloth with butter on top. and leave it in place until the burn has healed. afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
And the ancients said that the longer an open wound remains, the more it purges itself. and for this reason, it needs to be moved around.
And some said that one should let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burnt, and then scrape off what is burnt from the bone, and it should be treated.
And others say that one should leave the cautery on for so long, and press it so hard that you remove the bone as wide as a spindle that women use for spinning, so that the humors may flow out.
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, it should be cleaned and sewn up.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me, except in some men where there is reason for fear;
and I think that I should leave it; xspace 127
for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members;
and likewise when the patient's head is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healing and healthier to me, then I work on that together with healing.
When chronic pain comes to the whole head and lasts for a long time, then the patient should use irises and pills that are called "cock's comb", and of purging of the head and of oils and plasters; and if one performs the cautery that we have spoken of before, and it does not work. Take care that the patient's head is not of a strong nature, and that it is not too cold; Then cauterize under that cautery a little bit, as we have said above. After that, make a cautery on each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place called "vessel". And it is the place where one puts cupping glasses. And lift your hand so that you do not see the bone: The patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it elsewhere.
And the cauteries of the horns should be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the method.
of the cautery of the head When sudden pain comes to one part of the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the eye is purged with cleansing medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and none of these help. Then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, namely with hot iron and with fire.
The cauterization with hot iron is done by taking a piece of alder wood, removing the bark and chopping it into two pieces, then making an incision in the place where the pain is felt so that you can insert the piece of alder wood under the skin;
and when it has been inserted, tie it and press it firmly, leaving it in place for twelve hours; and then untie it and pull it out, and leave the wound open for two or three days; then place a cotton ball soaked in butter on it until it heals.
After the wound has healed from the ointment treatment;
And if you see it done thus, do as with some burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth chapter about burning medicines.
The iron cautery is performed in this manner. Heat the cautery whose shape is as follows:
And it is called "clo" because the head is made in the shape of a nail with a hollow at its tip, and in the middle it has a small opening.
And place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand steady and turn it a little lightly, so that half of its thickness is burned.
And lift your hand so that the part outside does not burn, and there will be an abundance of blood flowing out.
Afterwards, place cotton wool in vinegar, and put it on the spot for three days. Then put moistened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cautellare", then do so at the very tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.
of a migraine
When you cure this migraine as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the previous cautery of medicine and iron does not help him at all, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
And thus on the painful place a line of half two units long, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cut the artery and do not go as far as the bone.
And beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerve should not have regard for it or spasm come to the patient, and beware of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear in cutting, and also for him who does not know about it, who is not learned and experienced; And leave the work halfway;
But I will tell you how to staunch blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you the place where it is needed in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals;
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, along with the cautery that has two knives. And this cautery is better and more helpful than that one.
of the ear pain due to cold
When ear pain comes from cold, and one has worked with solvent medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the form:
After pointing all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and you move away a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place. And it should have ten points around each ear.
Then treat the place until it is healed.
Of the mouth's torment
Ailment that must be cured by cautery is none other than those that originate from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases.
And not to make a cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasm of nerves.
When you treat this similar condition of pain that comes from the flux of humors and purges of the head and gargles, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries. one on the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
and place the cautery in the healthy part of the body, and give a cautery on the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as one finger. and let the cautery remain until half of the hair is burned;
And this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the knife that we mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and the knife should be a little larger.
after curing the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When the stroke is old and you treat it as we have said, and there is no improvement, and the patient has no fever, then perform four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place that is called «vasselz» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the stomach's opening.
And let it be treated as we have said before.
of lead
For this illness, one should give the patient large doses and pills that modify the brain;
then wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and apply a mustard plaster to the occiput, as written in the section on plasters;
and this is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is cured in this way, good; and if he is not, then let him undergo three cauteries in the middle of the head descending to the neck, with two fingers' width between each cautery;
and treat him as the others, and if you see it worsening, and the patient is tolerant, let him undergo one cautery in the middle. And if necessary, two more on the two horns, and continue the treatment until it is healed;
And let the cautery be called "olivare", as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hair and of what we have said before;
after shaving the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck;
and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is tolerant, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; After the treatment, until he is healed, and let the cautery called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned be done.
Of epilepsy
The epileptic should not use the cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and able to take medication.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him a gargle and chew, softening the brain often with good meats;
After washing his head in the middle, and there make a cautery according to what we have said before, and make a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; And if the patient is strong and tolerant, make him a cautery as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olivier according to the method that I have said.
If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy there are corrupt and excessive humours or thick phlegm, then use the cautery of thin needles as we have said for those with paralysis.
And if the superfluidity inclines towards melancholy and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will purify the brain, as was previously explained in the division.
After washing the head of the patient; then make a bandage of linen well made, like a circle, and place it on the head.
and let the patient sit with their arms crossed, and be held firmly from all sides;
then present the linen cloth, and anoint it well with old sheep butter. and heat it over a moderate fire, so that one can touch it without being burned; then place the circle inside on the head, and let it cool down.
and do this for the patient once each week with other good treatment until they are healed.
And if you see cauterizing the wound by making several points throughout the entire cautery.
This method of cauterization moistens the brain equally well;
And then place moistened cotton soaked in butter and goose fat on top.
from the movement of the eyes When the movement first comes to the eyes by the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to cleanse the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times on an empty stomach.
Then instruct the patient to lean their head back, and perform a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on each of the temples if the flow is into both eyes at once, or one if the flow is into one.
and cut off all the veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then staunch it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incisions how to staunch it;
And sometimes one performs cautery or branding under the two bones behind
and one sees that it is from cold phlegmatic excesses, then make the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of the eye, descending to the eyes: perform cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with the brand under the two bones; And if more is needed, then cauterize it wisely on top of the skull with a small cautery.
When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give the patient three nights of cold drinks; after the king of the head, and makes a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery and makes two cauteries of the type called "nail" on the two shoulders, one a little below the armpits
and beware of the artery so that you do not cut it
And this is the shape of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the papilla of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivary". de la raison pourquoi cela se produit :
And if you see [it] this way, make two cauteries on the two shoulders as long as the shoulders are;
and do not leave [the fire] there except until the third part of the skin is burnt, according to the method that I have said
of the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes turns backwards and pricks the eye, and then one makes cauteries in two ways: This means "it is to know about fire, or burning medicine.
Instruct the patient that they should let their hair grow long and even; And if they prick at their base, he should hold his eyes steady so that they do not move until they grow out.
When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your hand; Next, trace on the skin of the eyes a shape that is like the leaves of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
Then place moistened cotton in egg white and musk on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this shape:
Après cautériser sur le visage où tu as placé un peu de poche, fait-le plusieurs fois afin que l'endroit soit brûlé.
And the sign of the healthiness of the work is that you see the skin shrink and the hairs raised to the point of the eye.
Then raise your hand and leave it like this for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is gone. After the cure of ointment as long as it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come back and the skin is softened, then repeat the cautery in the same place, as you did first.
And if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a form from parchment like the leaf of myrtle.
Then take one .З. of French soap and one .З. of quicklime, grind them well together; and make it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelid paper. And if the patient is affected in only one eye, one should work on that one, and if in both eyes as well. And place moistened cotton beneath the eye in vinegar.
And let the head of the patient be in your hand and place your finger on top of the ointment, and press the pouch and move it each time the patient feels the burning of the ointment, for they feel the burning as if from fire.
When you have done this for some time, remove the medicine with your finger. And when the burning has passed, lift up the skin, and look if you see the flesh raised as if it were lifted by the constriction of fire or by incision; and if so, then all is well.
If not, then apply more ointment to the place where the ointment has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are focused;
then place a piece of cloth soaked in butter over the burned area until the heat subsides, then treat the ointment area, which is called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healed.
And if you must watch carefully your work with great care lest any of the medicine fall into the eyes.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then begin the treatment again on the area that has been softened by the skin properly, just as you did before; after the healing of the treatment until it is healed;
and this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this should be your constraints;
and the right way should not be denied to those who study this art.
of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you burn it with a cautery according to this manner.
Command the patient to place his head in your hand; and let the servant hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor should he lower his head;
After, place moistened cotton in egg white or parsley juice over the eye;
After, heat the iron which is thus:
And it is shaped at the tip like the quill of a feather, together with the nail being the cauterizing iron.
If you wish, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, let it be like a tent pole.
However, this shaped one is more suitable for your work.
After, press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; And if it is closed, then open it, and draw out the head.
After, place the hot iron strongly on [the wound], and hold your hand on the iron at the side of the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not slip. And place the cautery in the oil’s fat, and it corrupts.
If you approach the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, then reapply the cautery once more, or again if needed, and leave it for three days;
afterwards place a moistened cotton ball in butter, and use the dry dressing until it is healed. If forty days pass without healing, apply a corrosive medication until the bone is exposed; And the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a manner of cautery for fistulas that some ancients said. Understand a fistula, and open the site; Afterward, place in the opening one subtle camphanum of this form: and it is made to the amount of one-third of an ounce of lead; And hold your hand firmly on the cauterizing iron, and let the patient not move at all, lest the molten lead run to his eye;
And it is necessary that one place on the patient's eye moistened cotton in white of egg or in water:
The lead is also useful for the place of a fistula, and the healthy one by marvelous healthiness.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have spoken of, it is good. If not, then a perforation must be made in the nostril, and the fistula should be brought back to the body of the nose according to its own proper place.
cracks in the lips Mouth ulcers often occur on the lips called "hair", and similarly on children's lips.
When you treat these ulcers as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat a small cautery knife according to this form:
And put it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the bottom;
then treat the place with wax until it is healed.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, and afterward it becomes putrid and rotten and is swollen and becomes a fistula; And you treat it as we have said in sections, and it does not benefit at all: Therefore, it is necessary for you to have the cautery according to the size of the fistula; after the hole or opening of the fistula, and keep your hand so that the iron comes to the bottom of it, and in the lower place;
And do this once or twice, after the treatment that we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the patient in your hand; After heating the cautery, which will be described hereafter, place a reed over the tooth.
And quickly insert the hot cautery into it, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth.
Afterwards, remove your hand and restart the cautery according to your will.
Then let the patient rinse his mouth with salt water, holding it in for an hour and spitting it out forcefully.
And in this way the tooth that was moving is made firm, and the softened gum is restrained, and the moisture causing corruption is dried up.
of toothache
When toothache comes from cold, whether it is in the air or wind, and medical treatments do not work, then there are two methods of cautery needed. And that of butter and that of fire.
Cautery with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and put the end in an iron or bronze spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent peg, and moisten it in melted butter, and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it is cooled;
and thus do often until its power comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moisten wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the aching tooth, and put hot iron on it until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you take a reed of iron or bronze, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth;
après que tu as chauffé le cautère (de sorte que sa forme vienne comme indiqué ci-dessus), place-le sur la dent et maintiens ta main en place jusqu'à ce que le cautère soit refroidi.
fais ceci souvent, car la douleur disparaîtra le même jour ou le lendemain.
Et il faut que le patient remplisse sa bouche de bon beurre avant l'application du cautère, puis qu'il rince sa bouche.
et voici la forme du cautère :
Et fais un cautère sur n'importe quelle dent que tu veux, en fonction de tes capacités.
et voici la forme de la canne :
of scrofulas Lorsque les scrophules sont causées par des humeurs froides et humides, et qu'elles ne répondent pas à la digestion par des médicaments, alors chauffe le cautère comme indiqué ci-dessous. Il doit avoir deux ouvertures pour permettre aux fumées de s'échapper du côté opposé du cautère.
And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it there for three days. And place a cotton swab moistened with butter over the burn until the blister is removed.
Afterward, treat the area with onions and linseed until it is healed.
When moisture prevails on the channels of the brain, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must first be emptied by purgative medicines.
Afterwards, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go as far as the throat, but only a little way into the esophagus.
After that, he makes another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle" as we have the form before;
and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.
When the disease is due to cold moisture, and the patient has neither fever nor dryness, and the disease is chronic, he should make two cauteries on the temple in close places; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts;
and let the cautery be called "clavicle" according to the form that was said before.
And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking into the entirety of the cautery that is called "finger" as its form is described here in the case of ear disease;
And let the points go as far as 30, or around that number.
After curing the place according to what was said before, and let the cautery be at three times according to this form:
And because the cauteries are lighter, therefore you make three in succession.
Of the shoulder dislocation
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, have the patient lie on his back and on his side; afterwards lift the heart which is inside the ribcage with your left hand's two fingers;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has 2 nerves below it, as follows:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and let the shape of the cautery be accompanied by 4 other cauteries;
and for this reason, make a cautery with the 3-nerve cautery, so that the figure of the cauterization is made up of these 6 cauteries;
and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the 3-nerve cautery:
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, so that there are eight cauterizers.
After place the cautery made of burnt hemp seed; then make the patient rest, and do not move the member for a long time until it is well rested.
And if it is dislocated on top, which happens rarely, then make a cautery above the thick part of the burn, or many cauteries in pricking.
Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When cold and much moisture come into the stomach to such an extent that it strains his complexion, and many catarrhs befall him, and in the usual ways of treatment he does not benefit, then the patient must be placed on his back, and stretch out his legs and hands. Then afterwards make three cauteries: one below the heel of the foot by the width of a finger, with all the cautery blazing, and two cauteries on either side so that the shape of the cauteries is in three corners, and there is such space between them that they do not touch each other when they emit pus;
and let the cautery be so deep that it reaches the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without deviation:
Et si vous voyez cautériser avec un grand cautère dans l'estomac selon cette forme ;
et celui qui aura peur de ce cautère, cautérisez en piquant et en touchant l'estomac à ce point selon la quantité que vous voyez d'en haut ; ensuite, faites céder tout le pus qui est appelé « poin ».
After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, until it heals.
Lorsque le foie a de la douleur due au froid, à l'humidité et à une grande flatulence, cela signifie qu'il a été fortement altéré par des excès de substances ; et le patient n'est pas guéri par les moyens que nous avons mentionnés précédemment, et cela ne lui apporte aucun bénéfice, alors il faut qu'il soit traité sur la base de ses propres caractéristiques ; And make a sign of three cauteries according to this form and this shape and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the ribs of the man come.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger; And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too much with your hand on all the cautery;
And let only half of the cautery be burned, and let the patient stand on his feet.
And if he cannot, then let him be lying down, and extend his legs, and lift his arms.
And if your intent is to, then cauterize these cauteries with the cautery knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all the heart, for you would dry out the whole body. And let it not reach the boiling point, for the heart is very sensitive there, and you should know this for certain.
When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not very strongly;
And if it is in the membrane, then the patient feels intense pain.
And then, when this treatment should be carried out by the doctors, it is necessary for the patient to be seated upright on his bed;
And then have the place where the abscess is hot and then heat the cautery that resembles a grape, for this is its shape: And cauterize with the cautery until the heart is burnt, and reach up to the spleen, so that the entire viscera are all outside.
after the care according to the care of the excrement until it is healed;
and it is not fitting that of this cautery anyone should use except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whom many of these diseases have been corrected at some point.
Then he can boldly work, nevertheless it seems to me that it is better to leave him.
of the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make for pleurisy cauteries from the roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers. And wet it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize with the cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the part that is beneath the beard.
And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind a little; And one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the ribs of the chest opposite the cautery that is between the shoulders.
And do not press with your hand, but rather hold it openly as if smelling something.
And some old people say that some men use a cautery like a razor, and heat it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess. And so it is with pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is danger that the patient may die now or a fistula may occur which cannot be healed.
of the urine
When you treat the disease of urine according to what we have said in the sections on treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three ways of fire cautery which are all good.
From which there is a manner such that you make three or four cauteries, lining according to the length of the bladder, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before;
And do not press your hand onto the entire cautery, and let the patient be leaning on their back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
And lift the scrotum which is near the bladder, or the side of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the scrotum be according to the size, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
Afterwards, he applies two inflamed nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then draws out through the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you see, then cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
After the treatment when it has excreted pus for a long time, and this is different from the other treatments mentioned before.
Cautery is not beneficial to those with dropsy, except in the manner called "ascites".
When you heal according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your healing does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the buttocks, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the bladder, two behind the back on the spine, and one in the place of the breast; and let the cautery be very close to the heart's breadth.
Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to release pus, and do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery; And if healing is hastened, then the two intentions will be together with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the stomach should be the tool that we have previously shown; And that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is placed here before.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical and full of citrin urine, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; And lift your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et ne pénètre pas trop profondément, ainsi tu risquerais de toucher l'os citrin, et que le fer à cautériser soit conforme à cette forme:
After that, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shinbone; And let one of the long cauteries be below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
And let the cauteries heal over slowly without cure, for the awl comes out.
after the cure of other wounds that we have mentioned.
When an intestinal solution comes from cold and moisture, to the point that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by ordinary means of treatment; and you see the patient well-tolerating and of strong virtue, then make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before in the stomach cautery, in the circular cautery. and four subtle cauteries around the navel, each one subtly clavicle, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each eye, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure for hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or several, and they are old and consist of large, cold, moist, corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in sections, and it does not help, then make cauteries. Three on the spine of the back, which are entirely below the navel, point by point in a triangle, and one cautery below the anus two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face place one great cautery on the stomach, as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the bladder with all the cauteries closed. And let the cautery remain open for a long time. After the cure of the place until it is healed.
When you cut the nail, heat the cautery that looks like a razor, and then place it entirely ablaze on that cut nail; and leave your hand there until the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood flow is stopped;
do this once or twice, and if there is much nail, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards, care for the wounds until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on top of gold, it will have greater benefit.
When the patient cannot tolerate cutting or opening, which we will explain in its place, such illness occurs that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When someone gets a fistula, and it is open and emits foul and corrupt moisture, you should probe it all with a fine tent, and make sure that you know the depth of the entire tent.
Afterwards, heat the cautery that looks like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered, and restart the cautery until that rotten and corrupted flesh is burnt, once, or twice, or three times, according to how much is needed;
And guard yourself against drawing out the nerves that are within, and from large veins.
If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, guard yourself against these places, and do not perform such fevers except in a fleshy place, and consider that it is not persistent;
After curing the place until it is healed, and if the place is healthy and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed;
And if the matter is not removed, know that the place is torn, and the bone is corrupt at its root. And thus as one of those which we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from a great flatulence, and she does not want intercourse, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavicle cautery that we have previously mentioned;
And if we cauterize in the middle, she will have three cauteries in a line, and they will be of greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the opposite side above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one to the right and one to the left, and let each cautery be as long as the thumb of a man.
And make the cautery on the back, or two if you need it.
And let the cautery be clavicle according to the shape previously mentioned.
When the womb is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delayed; And when they come, there is great pain. Then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two on the back.
And let the cautery be clavicle, as we have said.
When the viscous moisture descends to the hipbone, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
And the place of separation is found, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip bone with a circular cautery, and sign before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle.
And let the cautery be such as that with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive cauteries, and let the cautery be as deep as all the hearts.
And care for it until it heals.
Of hip pain When pain comes in the hip bone and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not help, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of heavy humors with stinking pills, or other good similar pills. Afterwards, make a cautery on him;
and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, with burning medicines together, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is as follows:
you should cauterize on the hipbone three triangular cauteries in this manner, and make them deep and large, and let there be between each cautery a space as thick as a finger, and let the cautery be olive-sized;
sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hipbone, for which there are four, like this:
And if you see, then cauterize it with the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned for hip dislocation;
but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the flesh is burned.
And this is the manner in which one proceeds in sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip, and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
And if it goes as far as the thigh and the leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says he feels pain, and one cautery above the ankle at four fingers' width, a little to the left side;
and let the cautery be cupped, and let the thickness of the flesh be burned.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near there, then cauterize where he feels the pain with three or four points at the cautery which is called "point". And if necessary, do more of them;
And if he knows that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make him a knife or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and thus cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it for so long that the entire leg was swollen, as well as the foot, which was then punctured and rotted completely. After a colic from which he died.
And if the pain is in two places together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And the wise say that for the hip cautery, which is of this kind, make such an iron and let it be at the tip as thick as a penny or a little less, and let it be barbed, and from one barb to the other let there be the thickness of a pea.
And let the assistants be in two parts, and also like knots, and there should be one handle of iron well-made.
And this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then place it on the sore of the ill hip, and turn it over onto the healthy side.
And the cautery once, the cautery returns and leave it for three days. And then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time. After the care of dressing until it is healed.
Al-Zahrawi says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and if one sees little who uses it.
And yet this is of good cauterizations, which he can endure, and there where it fits.
The cautery of medicine is such that you make the instrument between the teeth in which descends the margin of the door, and let it be of brass or iron with one long side, and at the height have II holes, and between each the size of a finger's thickness; And they should be open from without and above, and join together according to this form:
Afterwards, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his healthy side, and then your hand very high on the box of the hip; afterwards throw between the two circles of the hot water which should be heated over the fire with a bag, and let it stay for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burning of it.
Because there is biting, as if by fire;
and when the biting has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip; leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until what is blackened by the burn is removed; and let it sit for three days so that pus can be drawn out.
and this would be the last aid after the treatment of onion until it is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or the leg, make an instrument that dyes with alum in the same way that you have done on the hip.
And this is the manner of hot alum, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take quicklime and live coal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. And if there is a small hole except for where the point of a razor can enter;
And if there is a small hole except for where the point of a razor can enter; and put another well-sealed pot on top of it, and put alkali, heat, and sweet water on top, so that there are two powders on top until you have well held it in your hand;
and leave it thus until the water descends into the sealed pot, then take all that water and throw it on heat and on alkali as before.
And then it will be very hot and is used in many works of medicine and in the cautery of other members.
For it performs the same work as fire, and there are other medications with which one can cauterize the hip well thus, such as terebinth resin, honey of cardamom, heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a treatment whereby a man was healed from the pain in his hip and sciatic vein, praising it greatly, saying that no other treatment was done, and that he was cured at once when this treatment was performed, and then he bathed as is taught hereafter.
And says in such a way that you take green and dry tin, and grind it very well with a little fat, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it there.
And let it remain for three hours, until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
And then have him enter the bath so that his body is slightly warmed, and put him to bed, and all the pain will leave, and he will be cured.
Et sachez que nul ne doit user de cautère de telles médecines, si ce n'est après l'évacuation du corps.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hairs, it helps greatly.
and the cautery should be done in this manner. Prenez de la laine et badigeonnez-la d'huile vieille, puis placez-la sur la fosse située entre le gros orteil et le suivant, appelée fossile.
Afterwards, take dry goat hairs and hold them in the fire until they are charred, and place them on wool, and leave them until they are stained;
and do it again in this way, and do not stop doing so until you feel that it reaches the hip, and that the pain ceases;
And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat.
Of back pain
When pain comes to the back, from falling or blows or too great evacuation, or similar to cold matter spread, for none of these reasons is it worth using cautery, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary that after the patient has been purged with stinking pills or other similar things, one makes on his back, where the pain is, three lines signified by an inch, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear;
And let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "point";
and if you see fit, do III or IV cauteries at the midpoint of the nail-shaped cautery according to this form:
Often this disease occurs in small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow forehead when they wake up, and fear; And you will find at the end of the spine on the back, and we see an appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
When you see this, and wish to cure it, then cauterize with the hot iron according to this form. So that the iron touches each part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed iron two or three lines, and let the points be close to each other.
After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, beware that you do not apply cautery in a place where there is a nerve.
of joint pain
When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that spreads throughout each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which physicians call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicines, it is cured by cautery in this manner:
Make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you cauterize on the surface of the foot, then make a full cautery at what is called the "point". And if the pain extends to the knees and other joints, which often happens, then make three or four cauteries on each knee from each side, making the entire cautery olive-shaped.
And if you need more, do it more, but do not hold your hand outside the length of the heart's blade.
And if the pains descend as far as the knee and the back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in this chapter.
And if the pain is in the hands, make an incision around the wrist two lines long;
and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make an incision on each joint and on the palm of the hand;
And if the pain reaches the ribs or the shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and administer medicine.
For if you take good care of him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
When vomiting comes in waves, and the bowels descend into the kidneys and this is recent, it should be that when you see him being treated, he should not eat that day; And that he uses things which cause wind to leave, so that the feces descend from his stomach;
after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to take his thighs until the buttocks are repaired, and bring them together with your fingers, and sign from below the root above the wrist bone, and all in one sign which should be similar to half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery with what is used for this purpose:
until it becomes white and falls out. Then reset the buttocks in their place; and the practitioner should take his hand such that they do not return behind.
and firmly hold the thighs of the patient, and place a pillow and a bolster under the thighs, and another one under the feet which he should hold with his hands; ︎
Then place the cautery on the sign as much of your hand as possible, and hold it straight and firm until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you reach the bone. And be careful that the boil does not burst when you apply the cautery. so that you do not burn it; and so that the patient does not die from this or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not go as far as the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be fine according to their size, and also large for adults according to their size.
after three days, cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is gone.
after curing with other ointments until it is healed, let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed.
And it is necessary that his nursing be prolonged for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he tries to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be provided with a well-made splint, and carry it for another forty days;
and let him have good rest, that he work little and guard against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and from laughing too loudly.
And when he does this teaching, then he is completely healed.
And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, let him make the cautery of the cautery again according to its size, and let it be burned a third of the heart. after the treatment as we have said;
and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-pronged cautery according to this form:
but first mark the place of the cut and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below, and then place your hand in the middle with the whole cautery nailed.
But the first cautery is lighter and easier.
Of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, from falling or striking, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poin
if it is healed from the first cautery, that is good;
if this is not the case, commence another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move to the nearest member, therefore you must do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
Mixtures are sometimes helped by cautery with great benefit, and likewise the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
When you see her being cauterized, take care if the illness is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not abate or stop, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: ‌ I insert the needle into the head at the nape, and the other towards the forehead at the hairline. and the second above the two temples, and one behind on the occiput.
and let your hand be such that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out freely so that the vapors of the gross humors can exit.
and cauterize on the bladder according to what was before.
And if the disease is scattered everywhere; and it clearly worsens, then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, and one cautery at the base of the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the buttocks and another nearby, and two on each shoulder. And two on each rib, and two on each tendon of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the lower part of the spine.
And sometimes one performs a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries are performed, the more help is provided, and the greater the benefit.
And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already completely corrupted.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the manner of irons.
After the cure, treat the place with flour of peas mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness.
and let the cautery be a little inside the thickness of the heart. then the treatment should continue until it is healed.
And sometimes one performs the cautery both on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed.
yet no one should interfere with it unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is aggravated and medicinal remedies have no effect, then one should cauterize with a cautery that is a little deep, according to the thickness of the heart, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then take flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a pigeon and blood of an almond tree, one part each; And let it all be mixed together, and bound with a cloth, and applied to the place until it is healed.
The treatment of cancer by means of cautery
When cancer first appears and you see it stop, then cauterize it with a circular cautery all around the tumor.
Yet the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the cancer;
yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupt, and I have seen it happen sometimes.
And a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around it, with the cautery that is called "circular," as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," it delays death either due to the excess of the disease or because of the weakness of the patient when he is old and lacks blood, or due to time; and you see that it hastens death: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards, leave it thus. Because she will hasten to die.
And if you see her pierce through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
And place your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" so that the cautery pierces through to the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it on the surface in such a way that the course of the corruption is alleviated.
After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
There is another type of illness called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than the consumption of a limb, for it consumes the limbs just as fire does dry wood.
If you see this disease in a place that can bear the fire of cautery together, then heat up the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is needed for the place where the disease is;
afterwards, cauterize from all sides until you remove all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupt may be removed.
And then leave it for III days, and apply a soft bandage with oil on the cauterized places until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of burning wounds producing flesh.
And if after three days healthy flesh does not grow, this is good;
and if not, then restart the cautery on that which remains of the corrupt place.
And this disease has sometimes been cured by liquid medicine instead of fire cautery;
but nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already described the treatment with liquid medicine in the section (on that topic). take as much as you need.
of leeks that grow near the feet It often happens that on the soles of the feet, according to our understanding, there grows a disease called "tumor," which is a large, hairy growth that hurts the foot.
And the cautery for this disease is done in two ways. That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is that you heat the cautery like it is a feather of an owl, and it should be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and there should be subtle edges;
after placing everything hot on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the head of the nail; and leave it there for three days until it begins to putrefy. then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with silk and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then treat the site of burn with warm ointment until it is healed.
And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, you should apply a hot water cautery to it. and it is done in this manner: take a reed of iron or brass, or a goose quill, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, on the small warts. and put the chain on so that it touches all around, then place a pouch of hot water on it, hold your hand well, and press your hand in circles so that the edge of the chain reaches the base of the nail, and let the hot water find its deep way to the root;
and let the patient bear the scalding of the hot water for an hour; then leave it like that, and it will be uprooted from all its roots.
Thus do one after another, so that you exhaust all those which are in the body, then cure the wounds which produce flesh.
When someone trembles from cold of the nerves, or from quartan fever or another, then you must make four or three cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra. And in the case of cautery on the foot, and also on the stomach for the liver cautery;
it will cause the body to shake, and speed up the healing process from the cold disease.
Sometimes appear on the outside of the body as baths or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupt substances.
if necessary at first when they appear, then cautery should be performed on each head of the boil: a subtle cautery made from myrtle wood, with the tip grasped in fire, or a long root of Aristolochia, or a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow afterwards, but the superfluousness from which they come is dissolved, and the person is healed.
But this must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there is a great loss of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; And it is a very serious matter to lose blood.
And yet when this happens to someone, you must hurry to put your finger on the vein of the wound, and press it very hard until the blood stops flowing under your finger, so that no drop comes out anymore;
then put on the fire several small and large olive-shaped cauteries until they are all red.
Then take I, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the vessel is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery until the blood is coagulated.
And if it spurts when you lift your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stopped;
and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient;
and know that when the blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well coagulated, even if the artery is large, except by one of the four methods that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to coagulate blood. And it must be bound and held firmly.
Whoever administers stopping by tightly tying cloth or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, if it does not benefit, it can be of no use.
And if this happens to anyone and he does not have a mirror or medicine at hand, then he must put his finger tightly on the vein's wound as we have said, and press firmly until it is constricted above the wound and above the vein. And do not move the finger, but frequently apply cold water until it is very cold and the blood becomes thickened and constricted.
And make inquiries beforehand about those who need cauterization and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases that require fire cautery or hot medicines, and the questions and causes, and the instruments and forms of cauterization.
And I have placed this chapter from the top of the head to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same route so that one may find more easily what one seeks.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake folly. For many kinds of people come for treatment. if they are of such a nature that they have taken care of themselves with their illness to the point where they die quickly because of the madness that they experience from their illness and the severity of their sickness. And of these one should have fear.
And there are some who give you their mind, and say: "wait, I am healed"; and the illness is spiteful.
You should not agree with those who come to you in this manner, but put more importance on your honor than on your greed. Do not open yourself foolishly, but wisely to that of which you are certain and from which you can receive benefit and praise.
and use prognosis and diagnosis in the treatment of your patients, so that health may be restored;
and this will help you to acquire good renown, glory, and praiseworthy memory.
Very dear son, may our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter in discussions by chapters, following what is before the chapter on cauteries, which I have discussed from the head to the feet, so that you may find more easily that of which you will have need.
You should know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, and when the midwife holds the baby's head too tightly.
and sometimes it happens for no apparent reason.
And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all the cases I have seen, death comes quickly. Therefore, it seems to me that I should refrain from treating such cases.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day so that he could not support it.
and the moisture increased so much that he died, and this moisture is collected under the bone on the forehead, between the brain and the bone.
And the operation is such that if there is moisture between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut a wide slit in the head.
and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out.
and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, as shown in this figure.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the seams of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out strongly when you press it with your hand inside, and this is not answered to you: then you must cut three slits in the head like this:
And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. After closing the slits with lint and powder, put wine and oil on them, and leave it like this until the fifth day.
Then dislocate it, and treat the wound with compresses and ointments, and let the head be pulled evenly, and then give the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another method of incision is that you observe where the abscess opens and the gathering of pus;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes to the right; and sometimes to the left.
Therefore cut there where the abscess opens, and the accumulation of pus, and make the incision according to what you can do about it;
and beware that you do not cut the artery; And let there be a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
Lorsqu'il arrive à quelqu'un une maladie appelée «catarrhe» aux yeux ou au sein, et que la maladie est ancienne, et que le traitement par médicaments ne profite pas, alors le dernier recours est la cautérisation avec ce dont on coupera les deux artères.
Therefore, when you see them covered, the patient should lean back. After rubbing the area with a rough cloth until the veins appear, the patient should pull their neck taut against the entire cloth. then look where the vein beats, and the location of one and the other are behind the ears, and they are found rarely;
then mark the places with ink, then cover each one with a sharp spatula of two parts, as deep as the cut goes to the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
And if you see, push the spatula underneath the artery and cut above it, cutting as one should across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood jumps up continuously outward.
And if the artery does not open to touch, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers' width, then take hold and cut down to the bone.
And that which should be put out of the blood is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
Then look at the wound: If there remains a point on the bone like a spike, then cut it so that such abscesses do not come there; then press the wound and bind it, and continue the care of bandaging until it is healed.
of migraine Quant old age comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples, and ancient insanity and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all this does not benefit him at all, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient should let the hair on his temples grow long, and pay attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its pulsing, and it protrudes little outside except in some men who are too cold;
and if it is broken, let the patient pull its neck with some cloths, then rub the place with some rough cloth, and rinse the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spoon of which there is the form here: then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then draw it up with forceps, and carefully separate it from the tissues that are underneath each part.
and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of the hook, then cut that part according to the quantity of the two fingers. For if it is not cut, then the blood does not stop at all.
And draw blood for the VI c/j until III;
and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the wound is healed, and let the blood flow out gradually.
Then cut the excess that is between the two ligaments in that same hour, and then, if you see fit, use the cautery knife to cauterize down to the bone until the joints are severed.
And this is a moderate work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm temperament. Because the cautery serves to dry out moisture: for this reason it is of great help against moisture.
Where, for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the place with old cotton and apply well-made bandages on top.
And when they are unwrapped, let them be treated with dry medications that promote the growth of flesh and bandages until they heal.
And if there is no bleeding from the artery as long as you work there, then hasten to use the copper with the caustic, and apply it to the place where you have put the vitriol and hold it in your hand until the blood is cauterized. And if you do not have this available, then place your finger on the spot until the blood is frozen, and wash the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it as needed.
And there should be a finger's width between the two knives, and then when you have burned both places with the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the wound in two places. And let there be a space between the two heads, for it is not fused by this cautery entirely.
and this is the form of the cautery:
And one who is more skilled and lighter in extracting the artery is that you should cauterize the wound with this sharp caustic from two sides, but let the incisions be well spaced to retain their heat longer. Because when the instrument is too damp, it retains less heat.
tears When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on top of the head of the shoulder, and no medical treatment benefits it, and you see the face of the patient redden, and he feels a throbbing in his forehead as if trembling; and the eyes are cloudy and moist so that the hair of the eyelids has fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and scalded by the burning of the tears, then this treatment is needed. And the ancients called it "treatment for bruising," and it is that you should instruct the patient who has this disease to let the hairs grow on his forehead. Then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "treatment for bruising," and it is that you should instruct the patient who has this disease to let the hairs grow on his forehead. Then make three incisions on the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; And let one of the incisions be like this: two fingers' width across the forehead, running down to the nose, and the others, two fingers' width apart, above the ribs. Be careful not to cut the arteries that are on the sides, above the ribs.
Keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be three fingers' width wide.
And have ready a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping away the blood, then apply the pointed spoon in two parts as shown here.
From the incision by the temples down to the second incision; And scrape all the skin that is between the two incisions, along with the soft tissue that lies on the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this spoon firmly. If you insert into the first incision the instrument called "scalpel," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, it is this form:
And place the sharp side towards the flesh to the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle of the incision.
And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the heart, and then make another cut in the middle fissure until the other extremity.
And then drain the blood equally, and press the area where the blood was taken;
Then place in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on damp cloths soaked in wine, oil, and garlic, and ensure that any abscess does not develop there.
And on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply a large poultice of hot water, then treat with ointment made from basil and rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until it is healed.
When a person has an acute catarrh, and you see the eyes dimmed and small, and the vision weakened, and the eyelids burnt; and the hair falls out, and there is sharp pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know by these symptoms that those substances and this catarrh come from many veins, and the appropriate treatment for it is as follows:
And it is that you command the patient to shave his forehead, then make a great incision in the middle of the forehead, and another on both temples. And begin from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during chewing;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then remove between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen bandages there; then place on it cloths soaked in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances that promote the growth of flesh.
In this manner: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them; and administer it to these wounds to promote the growth of flesh throughout.
Of ear blockage
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: or grain, or beast, or stone from a mine or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; And things flowing like water and easily, and similar things.
When it falls into the ear, stone or other kind of thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, then let some drops of violet oil or sesame oil drip onto it, then bring about its extraction; and make him sneeze with pepper, and stop up his nostrils when he is about to sneeze, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and stretch the ear upward.
Many times this cure succeeds;
and if it does not succeed, bring about the extraction with fine tweezers, of which here is the form:
If it succeeds with tweezers, that's good; xspace Car il n’i ad point de perill, et ne desnature pas li membre.
if not, then bring about the extraction with a subtle little instrument of small size
and if it does not come out by that means, then make a tube of bronze and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal strongly, and stop up what is around the tube with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the tube then pull very hard, for very often it comes out as we have said.
and if it does not come out in this manner, then take birdlime and put it into some instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it then press the birdlime onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull hard.
And if it does not jump out of all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear before an abscess or spasm comes.
And the manner of the split is that you first bleed the patient from the temples, and draw blood according to the measure of his strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear at the fat or hanging place; And let the cut be like a crescent moon, until you reach the bone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck on it quickly to your mouth;
And continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if there is pus which is inside and it swells, then administer extraction.
And if it cannot come out, then administer a fine thin sponge according to this form: and make an incision in that abscess
But do not make it when you think that the pus is moist because of the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces.
Then strain it through fine sieves and in a press, as we have said, so that the extraction may be light.
When water falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to sneeze first with condiments, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same side where the water is. if it jumps through this, it is good.
And if not, then take many stones according to the length of your hand, thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire; xspace And put the patient on one side of his ear, and make him sit on his feet on the other side, and strike another stone against the stone that is in the ear;  xspace abei And do not stop making as if of stone on stone until all the water has come out, and so it jumps out all at once;
And if you see it, take a reed and put one end in the ear, and set fire to the other end until the reed is completely burned.
Then do this again with other reeds until all the water has come out, as we have said before regarding stone.
In extracting a small creature, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the section on division;
but if it is large enough to be felt, then use an extraction by puncture; And this is the easiest way to remove anything that might be in the ear.
In the extraction of maggots from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear towards the sun. If there are any maggots present, draw them out with fine tweezers. And if they cannot be seen, then take the cane as we have described its form.
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the finer end into the ear according to the amount of the patient's suffering. Then suck on it until the entire cane is empty. Do this frequently until all the maggots come out.
And if they do not obey in coming out, then stop up around the cane with cotton as I have said in the previous section.
And if they do not protrude strongly as we have said, then administer the distillations that the ancients have proven in the killing of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations.
And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, then the form will be like this as you see. And whether it is made of silver or bronze, let there be small holes at the bottom and an opening above for distillation.
And to press in the distillation, use a well-made bronze instrument for this purpose. And if you wish, take a razor and wrap it tightly around the point with cotton. Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you wish of your medicines into the reed, and let the reed be in the ear.
Then put inside the ear all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is dripped into the opening of the ear. and let the patient feel inside, and let the drops be heated in a pot over the fire before they are dripped into the ear. and ensure that it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as effective.
Of ear blockage
Some children are born with no opening in their ears;
and the same thing happens to adults due to the obstruction of a wound or born flesh inside the ear, and these obstructions sometimes go very deep into the ear, so that it cannot be seen.
and sometimes the pot pours out of the opening, and one can see it well.
That which comes from the deepest part, if it cannot be seen, is of grave healing in many forms. And in that which can be seen, you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the hairy part appear, then work with all this spatula of which there is the form:
And let it be sharp and cutting both in front and behind fully, so that it does not wound the ear.
if the hair is of flesh or body of the ear, hold it with fine tweezers, and trim lightly until all that flesh is completely removed.
And if the excision is deep in the ear, then take a subtle and light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
If you feel the hair which causes the patient discomfort to hear, prick lightly and ensure that you do not damage the nerves of the ear.
Then place a tent in the ear according to the width of the hole, and moisturize it with Egyptian ointment. Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top.
and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary to remove the tent and insert another tent moistened in ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling has subsided. then continue the treatment until it is cured.
And if bleeding continues, soak a sponge in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatise on distillations.
This athelul that comes in papers from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and scrape it off with a spatula made of its roots. 》 Then put on the place a preparation of vitriol.
And if it comes out, then cauterize with the subtle lens-shaped cautery, and afterwards the cauterizer should move around the incision.
and many times they return, until something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
of the gravel Many times there come in the eyes something that seems like hail in its form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstone," and it is a mass of thick moisture in the eye, both above and below. the procedure is as follows:
the procedure is as follows: take care if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and this is a slight matter to know.
make it wide, then lightly scrape each part, then take with tweezers, and cut.
if you cannot cut without piercing the skin a little, it does not bother the patient;
and if the tear is large, stitch it together with one stitch, and treat until it is healed.
and if it is small, do not use force, because the salve will restore it soon and generate flesh.
And if the earwax has descended into the ear toward the upper part, invert the skin, and extract the earwax with tweezers, and cut and press from one side and the other.
and if the skin is separated by the incision, it does not matter;
And when a carbuncle is cut, lift the eye with salt water, and treat the place of one who eats flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is eaten on toasted bread, and this happens more often in children than in other people, and it afflicts their eyes greatly, and in the mornings they have catarrh, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes;
and therefore they always lie on their faces, and sleep face up, and their eyelids underneath are moist because the inflammation and appearance are covered by the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you squeeze the place between your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of this work is such that the patient places his head in your hand;
and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains externally each part, then place it on him; and press with your two hands from both sides, so that the edges are gathered into the circle;
then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit wide enough, and let it not be larger than the wound that is made for bleeding veins;
and pierce the skin completely until you reach the edges; and in many ways the edges of the slit come out, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Pull out then all at once a piece of cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out;
And be careful not to approach the opening, so that you do not reach all the way to the eye and injure it.
And if the skin does not open at the beginning of the incision, gently widen the incision a little until it opens.
Then pull it out as we have said, then moisten the cloth in oil and water, and place it on the area, and bind with bandages.
And there are men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then cure with soothing plasters until it is healed.
of the hairs of the papers When hairs that are not natural appear on the eyelids and become entrenched, they harm the eyes and bring about various illnesses such as persistent tearing and softening of the lids and cornea, to the point that it causes blindness.
And there are four methods of treatment: either by cautery with fire, or by administering a drug according to what is said in the previous chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by canes, as I will say.
You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid towards your left hand;
if it is inside out, that is good; if not, then you insert a needle with all of its thread above. and place it near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near these hairs, and draw the thread all the way along the eyelid, and turn it towards the nose.
Then make an incision in the area under the skin, under the attached hairs, covering the entire surface, from the large lacrimal gland to the small one.
Then pull the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the skin, then sew a figure on the skin, such as the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount you wish to raise the skin which is divided for everyone.
And so, for someone who needs it, one should cut a large amount of skin according to how the skin is softened.
Then make an incision across the entire surface along the two lines you have marked, and begin from the large lacrimal gland down to the small one. and let one of them be a split near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the tip into one of the two corners of the heart, then peel it all off;
then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle with all one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the superfluousness of the threads on the two edges stick to anything gluey, if you wish to do this;
and if not, then don't worry about it, but leave the stitch and the threads for three days or four;
then cure the wound without stitches with dry and constricting things, for the skin heals by the healing of the wound and the assembling of it, but stitches are harmful (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear. And there is another way:
And there is another way: and it is that you trace the paper with a shape similar to the leaves of myrtle, as we have told you, three times devoided according to the form which is here:
Then cut that which overhangs the small forces equally according to the form that is here.
And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and put it into the figure; and put another thread near the large tear duct, and a second thread near the small one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers;
then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have traced, as we have told you, then join together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar ointments that ease.
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the skin is turned:
then you must use what we have said about the incision;
but the stitching in one and the other is more artful.
The treatment of dogs is according to this method: and it is that you turn the skin and the split inside as I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two thin ligatures as long as the width of the spatula; 👉 And it is that you turn the skin and the split inside as I have said, and then make two dogs and two thin ligatures as long as the width of the spatula. And cut both heads of two parts where you hold the threads;
then assemble one with the other carefully on what hangs over the paper of the eye, and firmly hold the two handles of the two parts; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is held will die and blacken and rot, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, then cut with force, then care for it until it is healed;
and when the wound has healed, and the paper has been lifted off, and the hairs will no longer grow.
and this is the shape of the two handles that you will make according to this drawing, and according to this quantity in length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine needle, and put a thread of soft and fine silk through it. Then join the heads [of the needle] and knot them together finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm long.
Then put another fine silk thread in the quiver [needle holder] briefly, and knot the ends of the thread;
then have the patient place his head in your lap.
and let it be by the sunlight so that the work may be illuminated, for this is a subtle and small work. Then put the needle all the way into the quiver at the root of the hair, and make it pierce the skin quickly until you draw it over the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair until it reaches the flesh, and push into the flesh that hair, if there are one or two or three or more.
Then pull your hand until the hair comes out completely from all the flesh into the skin with the natural hair.
And if the flesh is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then you will pull the flesh down to all the thread that you have ordered there, until the flesh comes out from the hole above and you see it with your eye.
Then pull out the flesh and the thread, and close the eye and the wound for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh rises.
And if the hair is small, then accompany it with a long natural hair, and let it grow with that one until it is lengthened, and then remove it.
of the eye's infection When this disease called "aleacrati" or purulent matter comes into the eye, there are two kinds of it.
One is natural, and the other is unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting, or from cautery, and similar things.
And the manner of treating it is to cut open that membrane, and separate its lips, and put inside linen threads, and leave it there until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use in the treatment of it things that dry out and restrict. Because if you do this, then the disease returns worse than before;
But for softening agents, such as fenugreek; And let the rose of water or althea and flax seeds be cooked, and onions of the same type melted in some of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and this is the cure for that.
And the treasure of your treatment is to be careful that it does not close according to the shape it was before;
and this treatment that we have mentioned is not effective except as a remedy for this disease, so that it does not return to the shape it was before.
This illness, which truly is called "axacrati", is both natural and accidental.
The accident comes from a wound and from a cut and from cautery and similar things;
and the way to perform the treatment on it is that you take a needle with which there are two double threads, and the shaft in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left side of the cheek as far as the right, so that the thread comes out at two places in the flesh;
Then the flesh should be raised above all the needle, and the cup should be wide like a spoon. And if the appearance of the stone returns as it should, this is good;
If not, then take a scraper and place it in the cleft, and turn the stone, and make two clefts on either side within the stone;
And the heads of the two clefts should be at the two corners of the incision that you have scraped, and make such angles that when they are assembled, the appearance is like the letter which is called "Y.
Then remove that flesh according to the quantity whose sides are sharp beneath, following the stone, then join the two freed parts and sew them with a thread of wool.
Then, regarding the treatment of what we have said about softening medications and tents, until they are healed.
And if the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then you must make a clean cut under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said before. Then, drain between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
Then, drain between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said. And one should perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an engine with all his might so that he may bring back the figure to its natural form.
And the patient himself, according to what is necessary for work and instruments in many positions.
When this suture happens to some men in such a way that the skin above is adhered with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must push the point of a razor under the skin, and lift it up.
and use tweezers to cut it away, until you reach what is under the delicate membrane, which should not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer from the membrane being too sharp and hurting the eye.
and let your incision, with which you cut that assembly, be gentle, so that the skin returns to its natural shape.
and all that assembly is healed, and sometimes there is salty water in the eye, and lift it with fresh water, and with wine.
then place between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye abundant wool soaked in egg. and after the third day use collyrium and other soothing things until he is healed.
Know that the nail is according to two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard cicatrix, and another which is not nervous but is similar to white frozen moisture, so that when one touches it with iron and tries to grab it with tongs, no one can.
and both likenesses begin towards the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then closes his eyes; and lifts the skin to your hand, then twists the nail in the tweezers with fine pliers, and extends it upwards. then take a needle, and insert into it a hair of a horse or cow or ox, and make the thread strong; and bend the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the nail, and push through to the end of the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and extend it upwards, and scrape off all the skin on the side of the nail that follows the vein and the silk along the hair until the head, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with all the subtle spatula and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct, so that through the incision does not come the body's usual tears.
And sometimes the nails extend to the nail bed, and to the thread, as we have said. then after skinning, one has all the soft mucus from which this form is made;
And ensure that the mucus does not touch the fleshy tissue and break it, and that the little plum is not pierced.
And after the incision, throw into the eye a bit of boiled silk, and from the kohl made of lead oxide, and let it stay until the next day. Then the treatment of those who need it so that they may heal.
And if the nail is not fleshy, and you cannot insert the needle, and the instrument cannot enter, this appearance of a nail is often cured with medications.
And they grow as I have described in the division, and if you see them covered, work with the eye of the patient, and take the fine spatula little sharp according to this form: And gently lift the nail above, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason approaches, then drip from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of lead, red and burnt collyrium, and plug the eye until the next day;
If nothing is wrong with the eye, such as an abscess, then leave it alone, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
then repeat the other work according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid night in the eye causing great harm, then suspend it with the hook, and cut part of it but not all, so that the body of tears does not come there;
Then distill into the eye red choler made from lead.
In the eyes of some men there sometimes appears red flesh, and it covers the pupil and stretches onto the eyelids and turns outside, and it resembles a bawdy rose.
and the procedure is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then you open the eyes, and scrape all that flesh with appropriate tools for this purpose, and support it with strength.
then scrape the first layer of flesh, and continue scraping with the razor until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure.
and let the incision of the spatula be such that we have described in the incision of the nail and small veins from which one removes the pus, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, fill the wound with burnt oil in which you have distilled red-hot iron or similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton wool over it with a layer of egg white to ensure that the abscess is hot.
And if there is anything remaining, and the pus overcomes you, and you doubt that the abscess is hot, then leave the wound alone and treat the abscess with things that can soothe a hot abscess.
Then return to your work until it is healed, and do the same when flesh grows in the wound in this manner.
But nonetheless you must adapt the treatment for each weak wound according to its natural way. And of the way of accident, in the work of iron;
And do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is able to endure the work.
If they are red veins that cover the eye, and take away from sight its function and weaken the eye always.
Therefore, first you must check if the eye, in which the arrow is lodged, is sound and there is no other disease besides the arrow. Then take the eye in this manner:
Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those veins with all skill according to one's wisdom, and let the thread be fine and doubled according to this form:
And let there be two ounces by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then bind those veins firmly and tightly, and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins retreat from the eye.
And be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not cut more than those veins;
And when you have done this, drop into the eye green and red choler to corrupt what remains of the humour.
And if you cannot remove all of it in that hour, then make a plaster for the eye with soothing substances to relieve the pain, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and assured of heat from an abscess, then begin again according to this manner as before until it is healed.
And this is the form of strength:
The physician thus calls "healed" fissures:
when you cure it by cautery and with hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is pus in it that you should incise over the abscess where it should die, and draw out all the moisture there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the putrefaction and blackness, then clean it with all the instruments whose form is described here.
and it is called "sharp hook," and should be made of iron, and should be pointed like a file as shown in the present form.
And place under it the rotten bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the putrefaction is gone.
and do this several times, then restore it with drying medicines.
if the place is healed, and flesh grows there, and the body of the wound is healed, and it remains so for forty days, and does not reopen or become infected, and no bad accident happens, then know that it is healed.
if not, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the neck's opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with an iron instrument, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered, then take a drill according to this form, and let the iron head be at three angles, and let the shaft be narrowed up to the head as you see here:
Then place it on the bone next to the eye socket, and move your hand away from the eye socket, then turn the whole auger until it pierces the bone, and the patient feels this because the air comes out if he keeps his hand on his nose.
And then restore the place with dry medicine, as I have shown you, and when the flesh heals and the place hardens, the matter goes to the nose. It is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eye is completely open and nothing interferes with the nose or makes it smaller, then you must tie up the patient.
then heal it, then apply cupping glasses or cauterize without burning to draw out, then place on the eye a plaster made of alum and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then bandage the eye, and put a compress on top of bandages and cloths.
and the manner of bandages is such that you take sufficiently soft bandages, and fold each one in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs.
then hold it firmly in place with a strong bandage, and reapply the cupping glasses to draw out without wounding;
then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye bandaged day and night, and if the bandage loosens, you must bandage it tightly;
then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye improving, that is good;
if not; then reapply the poultice and the bandages and the bandage and the cupping glasses until it is healed.
Of the breaking of woven cloth Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, then it opens, and comes forth from the papers like a grain of resin, and is horrible to behold.
Then if you see it open, the work is such that you thrust a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper one, then thrust another needle where there is a double thread from the edge of the arm. and make it pierce through, and leave the first needle according to its position.
Then cut off the place of the double thread and tie a part of the vein around it, and hold it well, then withdraw the needle and place on top of the wound a wet linen cloth soaked in plenty of egg.
And let it stay until the thread comes out with the pus, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
And sometimes the wound is confined by a circle of cloth on every side until it is healed.
And if the eye gives a great appearance of it, pierce it with a fine spatula that reaches to the bottom of the eye, and let the whitish moisture flow out, and immediately put something in.
Then remove it until it is healed.
This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but mucus that accumulates in the eye, resembling water descending, and it is not water.
And the manner of the appearance of the work is that you have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the vein coming above to your eyes. Then insert a needle, ensuring it does not descend and obscure the light, and let the patient see things as usual.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the vein is not prepared as we have said.
Then have the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and make an incision on the horny tissue at the junction with the horny layer and the corner of the eye, until the vein comes out.
And when it comes out, drip hot water mixed with honey into the eye, or water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye We have the likeness of waters in their nature, and those which must be pierced; do so according to health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and close the healthy eye and press very hard;
then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right;
then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right;
Then place the tip of the instrument next to the corona through the thickness of a ray in that part of the eye called the minor lacrimal gland, then push the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand until it pierces the eye's white, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space;
And the measure of the path of almagda should be exactly equal to the measure of the space from the plumule up to the end of the pupil; and this is the corona of the eye;
then you will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument where the water is, then press it along one path after another.
if water flows now, then the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a short time, and if the water rises again through the second passage, place the finger with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, then gently pull out the amalgam while turning your hand little by little.
And then put in a bit of fine salt, and remove from this the finger with the instrument. Then place over the eye a compress or wet wool in rose oil and plenty of egg, and bind with healthy oil.
We, and those of our time, use horseradish with plenty of egg.
And if the almond cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which has this shape:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too deeply into it, but make a subtle place, then put in amalgam as we have said.
And at the completion of the work prepare a suitable bed for the patient, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
And he should be free from all movements, and take light foods, and not move his head to the right or to the left, and let him lie according to his condition until the third day.
then dislocate it in that same dark room, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day;
and it is not necessary to do this at the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but you must lift it up, because water rises quickly.
if swelling occurs, dislocate the eye before the seventh day and apply a poultice that relieves swelling;
and when it is calmed down, dislocate the eye again and place an eye patch on his face for some days, and he should always be in that dark room.
Then he should leave the house gradually, and return to his usual activities;
And know that no disciple should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from Yrach, and he told us that in his country they make an almagda pierce, which is used to draw water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read of it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps this is something new.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of the almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them;
and they should be made of pure brass: And the heads of them should be of this same subtlety, and the rears in three acute angles.
Sometimes they are born or attached to chariots in various ways, so that some seem like scorpions with many legs;
And so there are of such where he has flesh with a fox-like color, and also flesh of good color. In that case, with this type of flesh which is smooth and not rough, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In that case, with this type of flesh which is smooth and not rough, it is necessary to make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; open his nostrils, and throw some incense on those smooth fleshes, and pull them out. then cut what you can hold with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that all the flesh is completely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be cut, then open it with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains. And if pus forms there, or an abscess, then treat it as needed.
And if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten and cauterize until the pus is dried up and all the flesh removed, then apply a mixture of honey, vinegar, and wine. If the honey works, and moisture comes to the palate, know that it is healed;
And if moisture does not come out as needed, know that there is flesh born in the bone above, which prevents the instrument from cutting:
Then it is necessary that you insert a small length of linen thread, and it should be knotted at each end by hand, with a space of one digit or less between the knots. And let the patient put the head of the thread in his nostril as best he can, and pull gently until it comes out through the mouth.
And often children do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it.
Then hold the end that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and tie them together just like us who are on the thread.
Do this until you know that the knots have destroyed that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, and wet it in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the dressing has dissolved all remaining flesh.
And then put in its place a plaster of lead for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them.
And this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, into which one distills the oils and medicines.
And it should be made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a plaster, and with the same shape.
And if you wish, make a closed plaster, and let the instrument be full to cleanse the head.
And it should have a handle for holding it when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh on the nose
Often arises on the head of the nose a disease called "telul," and grows and becomes great immediately, to such an extent that it is a visible thing.
And therefore you must cut it at the beginning and remove all of it, then place on it the cautery or burning medication.
And if one delays in cutting it until it is large, then beware if it is hard, of foul color, or of poor quality.
Do not touch it with iron, for it is an infiltrated abscess. For when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient.
And if the abscess is of soft touch and not foul in color, and you see that it can be entirely cut out, then let the patient empty themselves and cut it without fear, and heal the place with drying and restraining things.
Know that when a solution for continuity comes to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, except in some men.
It therefore happens to anyone when this occurs, so examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then bring the two lips together in a stitch, then cure it until it is healed.
and if the lips have already separated from one part to another, then it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of their heart until they heal, then bring the two lips together in a stitch, and hold them steady, and sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and ground incense on top. and place a piece of strong plaster or another adhesive plaster on the powders, and let it stay until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
The method of sewing is such that you gather the thread: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the abdomen; or with thread, as I have informed you.
of the lip abscess
In many people, hard abscesses form within the lips, resembling millet seeds, some smaller and some larger;
then you must turn back the lips and cut above each knot, and take it with tweezers and chop it into small pieces;
then fill the place after cutting with crushed vitriol, until the blood is stained.
and then apply oil of ashes, and dress the wound with dry materials until it heals.
Often grows on the gums a skin called "albulus" by the ancients.
so you must hold it with pincers, and cut it at its root, and let the wound or blood flow.
then apply powdered vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders on the spot.
and if that skin returns after cutting, which often happens, cut it again the second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after cautery.
Sometimes there are gatherings at the roots of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; And sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green due to decay, causing the gums to rot, and the teeth become foul-smelling.
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his chin should be in your sight, and clean the teeth or the scurf until nothing remains; And thus do with blackness, greenness, and yellowness, and other stains, until they are cleaned.
And if you remove what is there at the first root, it is good; If not, then repeat the second day and the third, until you have cleaned everything.
And know that teeth require different types of instruments for cleaning, as the work demonstrates, because the type of scraper used to clean between the teeth is different from that used to clean behind them. And these forms and others be prepared with you.
It is necessary that when you treat the tooth of its pain you delay drawing it as long as you can, for this should not be done. for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to draw it out.
Then when the patient is forced to pull out [the tooth], it is necessary that you be certain of the ailing tooth. Many times the pain deceives the patient and thinks that it is in a healthy tooth, and makes the good tooth drawn out; yet the pain does not depart from this, as long as the evil is extracted, for we have seen it happen to these gentlemen;
and when you are certain of the painful tooth, then it is necessary that you cauterize around the tooth on all sides with strong cautery to protect the gums from all parts;
then move it with your fingers or with fine tongs little by little and bit by bit, until it is well dislocated, then secure the tongs firmly; and let the head of the patient be between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and push it gently from each side, and remove it as you did first.
And if the tooth is rotten and decayed, you must fill it with cloths where the holes are; and hold it firmly but gently with the tongs so that it does not break when pulled.
and you must work very skillfully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And be careful not to break it, so that a part remains, and the patient suffers greater pain due to the root than before.
And beware that you do not act as the ignorant healers do, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the jawbone, and do not bring about what we have described;
but sometimes bring about great diseases due to the roots that remain there, or for the cartilage they break, as we have often seen;
and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine, or vinegar, and salt;
and if there is a flow of blood from there, which often happens, then fill the place with pounded vitriol;
and if that does not work, then cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, with which one pulls teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
and these are the shapes: And they should be of strong material so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made from good iron, and they should have teeth to hold firmly.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains after pulling, it is necessary that you put on the place cotton moistened in butter for one day or two, until the place becomes soft, then insert the tongs which are called "algefri", with which the jaw seems like a beak of a hawk;
And let them be made inside like a file, and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with these pincers, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," that is to say a forceps, in this manner.
And let it be thick and large enough so that it does not break, and if its root jumps out because of this, that is good;
but if not, then help yourself with all the instruments by which the shapes come hereafter:
And one uses this instrument which has two branches, as shown in this form. and other iron implements that are before the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, whose form is shown here.
And let this instrument be thick so that it cannot break, and know that there are many tooth instruments. and likewise other instruments, which are not counted.
and the wise master subtly finds his instrument by himself, according to what his work and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to their diversity; and if one does not break the cartilage or other bones, where it can, then look for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and help with the gestures, by which here is the shape:
And they should be thick and well-gripping to hold the bone, that it does not slip, but can grip and remove it;
And then restore the place with suitable medications, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then remove everything from this tool.
When the teeth appear not according to nature, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know if the tooth is new after the milk teeth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be sawn or filed.
Then extract it; and if it is stuck with the tooth, take this tool whose shape is like a small beak, and is made of iron at the tip.
And the pliers little by little in many days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it is visible so that it can be ground, then grind it with such a file as here is the form:
And it is like the wax from which needles are made;
And in wax little by little each day slightly, so that it does not move until it sets.
Then plain it at the end with any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then you must plane the roughness until it is smooth, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the front teeth are loose, from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot chew what he eats without them falling out, and you have treated them with strengthening medicine, but it does not work;
then they must be secured with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never moves; bidden:
And let the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth.
And if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between two healthy teeth, then place the wires between the crooked teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach sensibly to the other healthy tooth. Then begin the covering again from the place where you began, and gently and wisely strain your hand until it does not move at all.
And let your lace be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the wires of the thread with wire clippers, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, so that they do not injure the tongue.
And then he leaves it so tight as long as it can remain, and if it dislocates again, or the thread breaks, then he holds it with another thread.
if it remains and serves in this manner all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the meeting of two healthy teeth, and two molars, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, then one puts it back in its place, little by little, as we have said.
and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes one makes the shape of a tooth from cow bone, and places it in the place where the defect is, and holds it as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Sometimes this string comes from under the tongue by birth. or by an accidental wound;
and the work is such that you open the patient's mouth and hold their head in your hand, and lift the tongue;
then cut the nervous string widely, so that the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or a knot, and this is due to an accidental wound, then push in with the hook and cut widely that tendon;
and take care that the cut is not too deep, because of the artery that is beneath.
and when you have done this, raise the place with rose water and alum, or cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen.
And every night, the patient must comb out lice so that the wound cannot scab over.
And if bleeding continues, apply a poultice of vitriol to the wound; and if blood becomes thin, then cauterize with slow-burning cautery, which is good for that. then continue treatment until it is healed.
and if you see the wound turn black or hard, such that the patient cannot feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
and if it is inclined to suppuration and there is moisture, apply onion juice, and open the wound with a fine probe, and drain it from both sides. And if blood overcomes you in your work, then apply vitriol broth until it is scorched, then return to your work until you have drawn out all the strength;
then lift him up on a bed of straw and silk, and treat him with other treatments until he is healed.
Of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes there appear in the throat boils that are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
if it is a hard abscess of little sense and dark color, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the reason of bleeding; but let it remain until it is dead, and then you will cut it off, or it would burst on its own.
and if it is of white color again, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument to cut, but first look if the abscess is cooled and appeased.
Then make the patient sit before the sun, and his head be in your hands, and he open his mouth and hold the instrument between his teeth, and press the tongue down under the whole instrument, which is thus shaped.
and it should be of silver or fine tin as sharp as a knife:
When you press the tongue against the entire instrument and see the abscess, then take a hook and place it in the almond, and pull strongly upwards more than you can.
And draw something from the cloth with it, then cut with the instrument, which has this form, like tongs. And yet the heads are curved, and one against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
And if you do not have this tool at hand, then take the tongs, of which here is the form: And let them be cutting on one side, and notched on the other.
And when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and cold water and vinegar, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water, or boiled skins of pomegranates, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stanched. then heal until it is healthy;
and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them in the same way as the two almonds equally.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that had formed in her throat, namely one small abscess;
and it had nearly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like this for a day or two.
et avoit ja bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez,
Therefore, I hurried quickly and inserted into it one needle, then I drew it out, and I drew out with it a large amount of pus;
Then remake another part in the other hole of the nose, and he opened his mouth and pressed his tongue;
then they inserted a needle into these abscesses, and drained some of it, and only a little blood came out. and so the woman’s throat passage was unblocked, and she began to drink water first, then wine, and did not stop draining that abscess for a long time.
and the abscess always recurred and filled up the place that I had emptied, so much so that it became very large.
then I inserted a device into it and cauterized it inside the throat thus it remained without growing further
And let these parts depart from me, and let God alone have made them after me.
of the grape
When the vein descends into the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular";
And if it is below, thick and round, it is called "eye".
When it is cut as we have said in the division, and the cutting does not benefit, and you see that this abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then you must cover it;
And that which is roundly assembled and is not long; And it is bloody or of the color of a rind or black, then you must avoid cutting into it. For there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner that I have said, for its whiteness and length, let the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we made mention of before; Then insert the awl into the vein, and pull it down, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned for the incision of the two almonds.
And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut more, then you harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said for the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then you should use ingenuity for the cauterization to remove their fear.
And the manner of cautery is very sharp. And it is that the patient places his head in your lap, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cauterize with live coal water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; And in the use of this instrument, here is its form:
And at the tip it has a hair through which one puts the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye.
And the patient should be lying on their side so that the saliva and mucus run out of their mouth with the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat and wound.
Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it soften and the stinging of the medicine subside.
And if you see (this), take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above, until the cotton hardens on the eye.
And do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four days or five.
And if you need to start the cautery again with the medicine, then do so, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine;
and let it be rinsed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until healed.
This treatment is safer from incision than the cautery;
if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and lavender and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them in a pot, and add vinegar, and make it boil;
And the pot should be well-glued with strong earth, and within the pot there should be an instrument fitted in this manner: And let it be of silver or bronze, and one of the ends should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the vapors rise through the vein to the eye, causing the eye to become numb.
afterward it is often repeated until the eye dries out, and be sure not to do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things happen there. And not to do so unless at the decline of a hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not available, then take a reed and put inside the head a piece of eggshell, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot. because the cliff of egg does not allow the vapor to harm the mouth, and this is a good cure together with salt.
Many times it sticks in the throat as a bone or spine of fish, or some other thing;
so it is necessary that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you can move the thing;
and what does not open for you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps then the hard thing will come out with the vomiting;
or if the patient has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of wool, or a lettuce root, or a morsel of dry bread; etti And attach a thread to the sponge And when it arrives at the place, it will harden, and then you will draw the thread.
And if it does not come out due to what we have said, then take a lead instrument according to this form:
And let the instrument be curved at the top so that it may enter the throat more easily, and have the tip raised. And beware not to touch the epiglottis, so that all does not come out, nor push the bone inside.
And it is better that the patient himself places the instrument there, because he knows where the thing is hard. If he pushes downward, draw out the thread equally with all the instrument, until it comes out.
of the blood from the throat
A certain time is treated the blood, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; And when this does not help at all, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, after you have pressed the tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
And if you see the blood, draw it out with all the small hook, or with fine pliers that are suitable for this purpose.
And if this does not work, then take a sharp knife, and insert it into the patient's throat, then insert into the hollow of the knife a hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient is burning all day long.
Then take full one vial of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without choking, and move it with his hand often. And as soon as the blood feels the water, it will fall out.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
Do this many times, for she will fall without hesitation.
And the method of fumigation is such that you take a pot with live charcoal in it, and let its lid be covered with a sieve pierced in the middle, and through that hole should be the head of the instrument.
then cast your fumigation, and the patient should put the end of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that no smoke escapes, but it goes all the way to the blood vessels.
and now the blood will fall, and if it does not, then repeat the fumigation many times.
and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and such, and do not drink water.
And then he will need it to come out by this means.
And the shape of the instrument used to draw blood is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved pincers designed to enter the throat. And it should have the appearance of a seagull's beak and be rough like a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot release.
There are many similarities to an abscess, according to what is remembered hereafter in this book about one and the other, and they differ in penetration and cutting.
And it comes in two types: one is exactly like it, and the other contains moisture.
And the second type is according to the location where they are on the body.
for abscesses of the head are different from those of the fundament, and abscesses of fleshy parts are different from those that occur in joints, and each should be treated according to its own method.
And so with abscesses that one must not pierce, until the boil is dead according to its development;
And so with those that one must pierce when they are ripe and do not die according to their development, such as abscesses near joints.
For when abscesses come near joints, and they are left until they become gangrenous all around, by chance then the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is why it causes contraction in that limb.
Or if the abscess is near a principal limb, and you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb;
Or if it is near the foundation (of the body), then one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe;
And one should not pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for those near the foundation (of the body), lest it become gangrenous within and cause a fistula. And may not heal in a short time.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of the opening of the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the diminishing of the pain and redness, and the softening and the maturing of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
And you must make the opening seat itself in the most dependent place of the abscess, where it opens and moves.
And let the opening be long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints, and near nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no folding. In those who are sick, according to that limb.
And when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is healed with complete digestion, as we have said.
Car if you pierce it before this, then the body will be elongated with its poison, and it is full of much filth. And perhaps it hardens the lips and the depths of him.
And if any abscess is perforated according to the width of the body, according to how much the limb needs it.
And you must bring in small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many splits according to the size of the abscess;
And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the heart, and to cap; When it becomes like a piece of cloth and is dead, then you must do as one does with children:
And if there are such that are split into three angles, and there are those which one covers like the leaf of myrtle, as with abscesses of the anus;
And if there are such cases where one makes a round cut, and other cuts and similar chopping.
Those who have no head, such as a soft superficial abscess, you must pierce it completely;
and when the abscess is large and it has formed a great pustule, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the pus at once, but only part of it. then pack the abscess until the next day, then draw something again. do this several times from big to small, until all the pus comes out.
likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old and frail man. For the spirit may jump sometimes with the issue of the pus, which may cause the patient to die, and you may not notice it.
Avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have perceived your abscess, cleanse the wound, and look to see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a simple incision, then apply bandages of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess with many openings, then you must insert a bandage into each one so that they come together;
and if you have cut into the abscess some part of the skin and have pulled it over, then you must fill it with old cotton or shreds of linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
Then remove, and treat with ointment until he is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold and fresh water, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
And if the bleeding continues, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the place where the abscess is very nervous, then you must put tents and cloths soaked in hot wine and oil.
And if it is summer, and the place is fleshy, then you must put on cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, up to the third day, as we have said.
And then lance the abscess, and dry it, and treat it, as needed, until it is healed.
Et cela doit être reconnu universellement dans le traitement des abcès :
and I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Where headaches come from small abscesses, and they are similar to us who are in tissues, like the pustules of a chicken, and there are many such things.
There are some that are greasy and such that contain moisture like pus.
And there are those that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the surgeon does not do otherwise.
And the work of the cut is such that you try with all the instrument that is called "scalpel," from which the form comes here after, whatever it contains.
Because if it contains moisture, then open it from above the lung.
And when the moisture is emptied, scrape off the skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately if anything is left behind.
then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day; And those who remain from the night will run.
And then repeat the cotton treatment, as before, on the second day and the third, until you are sure that it does not remain from the night;
Then treat the wound with ointment suitable for healing, until it is healed.
And if the abscess holds a lot of pus, then open it according to this shape, lengthwise; and put your thumbs in it, and scrape it from all sides, and put all your effort into pulling the skin above where it lies;
And if the artifact gives you trouble, then do what I told you afterwards.
And do the same for an abscess if it is pus-filled; cut and cure it as I have told you.
And slice through the pus-filled and moist abscess, for it is lighter, because they are made of little blood. And if any of these abscesses in the head where there is no moisture, and of these was the abscess that I opened in the head of an old woman;
And I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken. And if one had struck it, one would have made just as much of a wound as with a stone.
In other abscesses that come to a head, especially those which come at the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made in the most dependent place so that the pus may issue forth.
And treat it as is necessary.
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come in other parts of the body, and they are many, and they are connected to each other.
And each scrofula is properly within its rib, just like the node and the abscess of the head, as we have said. And there are many similar scrofulae.
And there are many similar scrofulae. Il y a de telles [dislocations] qui retiennent l'humidité, et il y en a de malveillantes qui ne veulent pas obéir à la guérison.
And in that which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the body, and silent on all sides and is not harsh on the nerves of the neck nor on the artery nor on the passage, and is not deep;
so it is necessary that you cut above it, and scrape each part, and extend the two lips of the wound with tweezers if you need to, just as we have said in head abscesses;
and draw little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and let the scalpel not be too sharp or cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and do not advance too far, lest you cut more than you should.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and that does not allow you to work, then put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that staunch blood, and bind the wound. And let it sit until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate.
And when the blood has been staunched, then return to your work, so that you may complete it.
Then examine with your finger if there remain any small scrofulous swellings, and cut them out and clean them.
And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulous swelling, then it is not fitting that you cut this swelling at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm.
then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
And if you cut all of the scrofulous swelling, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them immediately, since there should not remain any excess due to the size of the scrofula. it is necessary that you aim to cut the root of it, and pull strongly, and stitch as we have said.
it is necessary that you aim to cut the root of it, and pull strongly, and stitch as we have said. Those scrofulous ones that have swelling, prick them where they appear black;
and prick it as mentioned before, then bring tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then bandage it with a pleasant ointment until it heals.
The ancients spoke about cutting the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
For those with scrofula, it is necessary that the slit in the throat called "epiglottis" be cauterized; And one should not provide aid by this method, because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are affected in those who have an abscess that is hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the two almonds.
When the disease is in the channel of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid suffocation that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it under three circles or four, a small transverse cut between the two circles or according to the size of the hyoid bone's cut, not at all in the laryngeal cartilage;
And those veins are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis because there is no flesh there, and the vessels are long.
And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to its full extent, then cut through the heart until it reaches the chin. And cleanse the vessels of blood, if you see anything, then cut the syphilis, as we have said;
And it is proven by the incision of the phlegm from the throat which jumps strongly through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice;
And leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed in which strangulation is feared, join together the two lips of the heart wound, and sew it alone without a dressing;
Then administer medicines that produce flesh, until it is healed.
Al-Zahrawi said that this should not be done until the throat is completely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect has healed. Therefore, cut the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
And for this reason, the elders commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the illness has passed. And it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to suture and cauterize the wound until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the tendons of the neck.
And I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je découvris la plaie, et trouvai le sang qui en était sorti, et même s’il n’avait pas coupé de veine ni de canal fort, la gorge saignait abondamment à travers la plaie.
I hurried and sutured the wound and cauterized it until it healed;
And nothing happened to the maiden except that she was hoarse of voice, and later returned to her former state.
For this reason, I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should not be fear.
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a great abscess of blackish color, and it is very common in women;
and there are two types of them: natural and accidental.
or the natural one has no fever.
And the accidental type is of two kinds, one of which resembles a boil on us, and the other kind resembles an abscess that comes from our artery; and there should be fear, and it is not necessary to work with fire except on the small one, and test and search throughout the throat. if you find it thus as we know fat, and it does not touch any vein, then cut it, just as one cuts the nose, and draw out all its hair, if there is any. and bandage it well immediately, and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
There are many types of noses, all of which I will describe;
and now it is necessary that I explain the entire difference between a nose and an outflow.
I say that outflow is hot and feverish as long as the inflammation has not passed and putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
With the nose, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a pus, which is its own bag and according to the color of the body, and it begins like a blister, and grows larger; }}}
And there are according to two similarities, either fat or moist, and many colors as I have said in the division.
Il is necessary that when you come to the cure of the nose, you test and examine first all the instruments called "entromissoire," according to what its form will be in the following chapter.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscess is that you take the most moist place you find on the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has reached the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the probe, and take care not to allow air to enter.
If the running moisture has a color, then incise it as I have said for other abscesses;
And if after the probe no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then incise it in a cross shape, and take it with forceps, and lightly scrape from each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it out healthy with the knot.
And if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
and if there is a small piece left and the wound bothers you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders, and bind the wound, and apply soothing things to the hot abscess, and continue other treatments until it is healed.
And if the pain is great, then suture the two lips of the wound, and treat it as if it were an open flesh wound.
And if the swelling of the vein is troublesome to you or otherwise, then hurry and fill the place with crushed vitriol, and leave it there for two days or three, until the wound festers, and let the ebullition of blood subside. Then return to the top where some of the liquid remains.
Here are the forms of the intromissory instruments, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
and there are three squares called "albaret," and one called "breb," and they come in three types. large, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistulae;
and they are similar to the needles used for embroidery, made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow in color are more effective, coated with black lead to encase the roots of fistulae;
And there are three kinds: great, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
The shapes of boils are very similar, as you can see here:
and there are boils that have two curves of three kinds as well;
and there are boils that have three curves, which are also of three kinds;
and there are boils with two curves, and boils with only one curve, all of which are of three types.
and all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these [tools] that are made are cutting, and there are such that cut only from one side, which are used for skinning fingers so as not to cut the vein or nerve;
And from these intrusions are made the sleeves, so that the patient does not notice them when the abscesses open.
And they are of three types: great, small, and medium, as you see;
And one should not use them except in fleshy places, such as the legs, arms, breasts, and joints, and similar locations;
And sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the bark of figs, according to this form, to stop bleeding. And sometimes it is put in place that heals quickly of veins, and of the arteries, and sometimes it returns according to this great form:
Sometimes men's breasts swell up when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts. ︎ Et c’est poour coi li preudome ne vont mie a leus nus quant il sont malades, por ce qu’il ne seent pas de la honte qui les est avenues par la maladie;
And they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must proceed according to this form from this line .b. until .g.. Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with medication that promotes healing of flesh, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if the breast sags downward and is softened due to its size as happens in women, then cut it into two ribs above, through two similar incisions. So that one is held by the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g.. Then peel the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply that which we have said of stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, then you must fill the wound with damp cotton and a corrosive ointment. And leave it until it melts away the rest and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
This abscess that comes under the armpits is like hard scrofula with bones, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture should be cut in this shape, from line b to line g: And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with suitable ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, incise it as we have said for scrofula incisions, and if the wound exudes pus, apply cautery as we have said before.
When the artery has burst and the skin on top is closed, it often happens that abscesses form, and it also happens in the case of a swollen vein and an abscess;
And if one knows this way when it is by the artery, then the abscess is long and deep. And when you feel it with your two fingers, you sense the constriction.
And when it is by the vein, then the abscess appears very red.
And it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the joints and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the use of fire cautery, and one who is chief should also avoid it, and in the case of inflammation of the artery, make an incision above the skin along its length.
Then proceed with the cutting as usual, and neatly separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed;
Then push under him an awl, and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, just as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then prick the place between the two ligatures with a probe until the pus comes out, and let the abscess be relieved.
Then proceed with the care that should follow afterward, until the ligature falls off. Then treat it as for an infection, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is because of the size of the vein, it is necessary that you take into your hand whatever you can from the abscess on all the skin. Then push the awl under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through to the other side; and there should be a double thread so that you draw it out from the other side; Then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with a thread between two of its extremities.
and if you doubt that the thread will not hold firmly, then insert another needle through all of the thread underneath the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the thread in four places.
then cut away the abscess until the pus comes out, then cut away the pus from the core and leave that which is tied.
then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then provide dressings of lint and ointments until it is healed.
Similarly, as an abscess can occur in the artery and vein, so too can an abscess form in the nerves when they are wounded or subjected to excessive strain, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and arms, and in all places where there are joints, and these are serious abscesses, and their color resembles that of flesh, and they are in many forms without pain.
And when one strongly stretches it, then the patient feels pain, which is not in the depth of the body, but beneath the heart.
and it moves well on all sides, neither forward nor backward, nor below nor above, and that which is in the joints must not be struck with iron. perhaps there will be contraction. And that which is on the head or forehead, make the skin into a small pouch.
And that which is on the head or forehead, make the skin into a small pouch. If the abscess is small, then hold it with tongs and strike at its root.
And if it is large, then suspend it to the hook, and scrape it off, then remove it and sew up the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Sometimes it occurs in the belly and not elsewhere, and it is an illness called "fungus" because of its similarity to mushrooms, and it has a subtle root and a large head.
And there are some small ones and very large ones;
And I have seen a man who had two in his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were always moist.
I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six pounds, and the operation in the incision is such that you should consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the tumor is white and moist with a subtle root. If he strikes the spatula broadly, and let the cautery be in your presence with fire.
If he strikes the spatula broadly, and let the cautery be in your presence with fire. For in cutting often comes a too great outpouring of blood, and if the blood overcomes you, then hasten with cauterization.
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of linen and bind it around the wound as we have said, and leave it for two days.
And then bind it tightly, and do not stop pulling the linen thread until he cuts the wound, and each time without difficulty.
And if the roots are large, there is fear of cutting into the intestines, but you can cut half, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
Then treat the wound, and take care not to cut the thin layer that is of a dark color, weak sensation, and milky appearance.
Car this is an encrusted boil, and I will come to the cure of boils later.
When the pustule is strong If the swelling of the abdomen comes from cauterizing a wound or a skin cut, and it is on the stomach and in some other areas as happens in other injuries, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as described above, or from flatulence;
and if it is from the injury of the skin and the excretion of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and it opens in various places. And if it is from the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers, it resists, and then returns, and perhaps swells, and greatly increases at the entrance to the bath and due to intense labor.
And if it is from moisture, it is a light thing, and when you press it with your hand, it gives way well, without any resistance;
And if it is due to blood, the abscess reveals these signs: it is large and hard, and fixed according to a certain measure. And if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the operation is such that you must consider whether the appearance is of blood from an artery or a vein, or of flatulence.
And if it is due to flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the operation is such that you must consider whether the appearance is of blood from an artery or a vein, or of flatulence. Then you must leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is of the intestines or stomach, you must instruct the patient to take a bath and lie straight, then sign all around the abdomen. then command them to lie down between your hands, and go around the marked area with all the spatial awareness, then extend half of the abscess upward with all the large hooks. Then tie the limb around with a strong thread or a sturdy silk rope firmly, and let the knot be tight.
Then work the half of the abscess stretched over the ligature, and insert your finger into it, and seek the intestines. If you find it trapped by the ligature, then loosen it, and insert the intestine out of the belly;
And if you find the bowel, then take it by the end, and cut off the excess.
And if the artery or vein opposes you, then go around it well, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads in them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross as you made it pierce.
Then restrain the abscess in four places with needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the place until it suppurates, and each of the dead flesh will fall off by itself. or cut it when it has been softened and suppurated, then treat as needed, and remove the abscess as we have said.
or cut it when it has been softened and suppurated, then treat as needed, and remove the abscess as we have said. and drain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as needed, and stitch up the place.
Of the cancer We have said in the division the similarities of cancer, and how one should work with it using medicines, and how one must avoid treatment with iron.
and we say that cancer begins in the flesh, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when a cancer is in a place where it can be scraped off, such as a cancer on the breast, or on the thigh, or in similar places, it should all be removed when it is in the beginning.
Nor has anyone ever healed from it before me.
And the work, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile some time.
then make him fast if he has evident fullness, then put the patient in a good place to perform the work.
then throw away your nails and scabies, and shave all parts, and remove it from all parts without leaving anything behind.
and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or any other thing, and if the continuous bleeding hinders the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped. Then treat him with another treatment until he is healed.
of the dropsy We have already spoken in the division about the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is done, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment that is done by medicine, and that which is cured by iron:
and one should not use iron in these two resemblances: that is to say, tympanites and ascites, because it is deadly;
therefore when you treat this resemblance of dropsy which is called «edema» with medicines, and the cure does not help, then see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as abdominal distension and similar things; If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of great strength, and he has no other disease but only dropsy, and he is not too young nor too old, then thus should you work: take the patient upright in your hands, and the attendant presses the belly at the lowest part of the foot, then take the thorny spatula according to this form: And let it be cut from two parts. with its point, yet not so deeply that it could reach the intestines when inserted, and not injure it;
then observe if the dropsy is located towards the intestines: in this case, you must cut three fingerbreadths straight down below the elbow; And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel, three fingers' width.
And if it is due to the spleen, then on the right side; and it is not necessary for the patient to lie upon the incision so that the excesses do not run to that weak place.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument and push through, lifting your hand to all the subcutaneous tissue between the skin and the fascia, as if scraping, to the amount of one nail's width or around it.
Then pierce the fascia until the subcutaneous tissue comes into view, which is the place of water, then draw strongly, and insert this instrument in the shape of a hook. And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and is made of light brass or steel, and has at its lower part a small hole. and on one side there are three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other;
and the head is cut like a quill, and it is the form of the incision that the scribe cuts into the quill:
at the top is the handle, so that when the instrument comes to the water, they now float on the instrument.
empty it therefore half or a third full, for if you empty more than necessary at that time, perhaps the patient may die from the loss of their spirit due to the weapon, falling into a coma or approaching death.
mais according to the amount of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's virtue indicates, and his pulse.
then extract the instrument and hold the water, and it is now held by the heart which stops up the hole which is on the sponge, about which I have spoken, that you should pierce in this manner.
then begin the instrument again the next day, if you see that the patient can endure this, and draw out a small quantity of water.
do this for some days, and beware not to let any more remain but just a little water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water in him, then heal him with a burial or hot sand, and through much sweating or bathing in the sun, and let him drink wine. And the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting the fluid, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
If he needs to be pierced immediately with a very fine needle according to this form:
Then insert into the puncture a subtle plug of beeswax, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to make urine, let the plug be removed, and make urine, and then replace it.
And perhaps it is not necessary there, for the violent urine does not leave it closed.
He whose opening is small, let him be treated with the linen cloth, as we have said, and it will widen.
Those who do not have the puncture in its proper place are harmed, for some are born with the puncture at the tip of the penis, which is why they cannot urinate forward unless they lift their penis upwards; And they cannot deceive because the material cannot reach the bone, and this is a serious illness.
And the way to perform this is for the patient to lie on their back, then straighten the head of the rod and the handle so that they are even with the width of a feather quill, so that the hole meets in the middle as it should be;
and beware of excessive bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, staunch it as one would staunch blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the pustules on the rod Often these ablations come to the rod, and there is an appearance of ugly flesh;
and some are malignant while others are not.
So you must take them at one time with subtle pincers, cut and clean all of them, then apply damp cotton in an Egyptian ointment. Then continue the cure of cleaning until it is healed.
And if the bath is foul, of bad color and stinking, then it is necessary that you bring a cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and if the bandage is partly on the stick and partly outside, you must first remove the part of the bandage that is inside. And when it is sewn together, then treat what is outside.
Because when you cure them together, it is not certain that the head of the stick will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption will occur in the stick and in the wound.
So it is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and beans, then continue with other treatments until it is healed.
And if blood follows from bleeding, then apply the lunar cautery according to this manner.
The cautery helps with two conditions together: that is to say, in the stopping of blood, and in the process of decay.
And if the head of the bladder is rotten and retracted, then you must insert a lead pipe into the bladder's channel, and have the patient urinate through it.
And when the hair is thick at the head of the bladder, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, due to a wound or abscess, then you must carefully shave it with one instrument, until the tissue is freed and the head of the bladder is released on all sides.
And if it is difficult to remove this, then you must shave the top of the bladder and the skin with a spoon-like instrument.
Then take a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water, place it between the two, and do not remove it again.
Circumcision is not a disruption of continuity like other wounds; Nevertheless, when we perform this work by our will, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and lightest work for their salvation.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we only know what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen that most of the masters and physicians who performed circumcisions did so on the penis, at the foreskin, and on the entire glans.
and blood flowed because there are two skins, and perhaps one was cut and the other remained. Then it has to be recut, and the pain is double, and at the cleansing of the penis, the tip of the member is not assured;
and in the cleaning of the nail perhaps the iron slips, and it ruins the work, and often it happens thus that there is no need for cleaning and I want it.
From the mundification which is done with files, I have found the benefit of the experiment, because the files cut as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, cut equally in every part of the nail always; but let the thread be well stretched around the skin;
and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child, if it understands, think that you are only doing it to tie the thread around the nail, and then let him play in every way you can;
then hold it straight between your hands and hide the strength in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see it, nor any of the instruments;
Then put your hand on the rod and blow into the heart, and draw it upwards until the head of the rod is inside. Then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then bind the place tightly with a double thread, then tie it under the fold to another loop.
Then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then bind the place tightly with a double thread, then tie it under the fold to another loop. And hold it with two fingers of the second knot at the wrist and index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly and draw out the head of the rod. Then let the blood flow drop by drop, for it is the remedy. And apply powder over the wound, and on top of the powder place a cloth glued with a mixture of egg cooked in rose water, infused with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it there until the next day, and continue the treatment with another treatment until it is healed.
The form of the strength for purification is this:
both heads should be sharp and cutting, and the heads should be as large as the hand equally:
The error in purification is when the heart escapes through the incision;
Therefore, it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail before the place makes an abscess;
and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
And if they pass three days and that which is under the membrane is swollen, then leave it until such an abscess be appeased, and lightly scrape away the skin.
If you move the cutting edge as well as you can, be careful of the part of the rod, it will not harm him at all.
Then cure the place of a sudden wound with powder, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if you cut into the heart too much and it goes upward, it will not harm.
Then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
regarding the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the presence of stones, or frozen blood, or bone, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone stuck in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over his knees. And let the patient's feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly over the top of his back, and let the patient hold his breath as much as he can. And then the neck of the bladder is constricted for the expression of the stone above, causing the urine to be released.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction with the entire instrument called a "syringe," which looks like this.
And let it be of fine silver, lightly hammered, like a bird's feather; And let the tube be one and a half palms long, and be thin at the top.
And the manner of urine flow is such that you take a double thread, and tie it to the top of a wool or cotton bag, and push the end of the thread into the syringe;
and cut the excess wool and push it up to the end of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and lift the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water;
then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis down towards the scrotum;
then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it approaching the empty space, and this is not done unless because the passage through which it goes is twisted.
Then they stretch the thread along all the wool tuft by tuft, and the urine follows the wool, then squeeze strongly, and make the urine run.
And start the syringe again until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When there are scorching or blood in the bladder, or rotting is gathered there, and you put water and medicine to distill, do it all with an instrument called a “clepsydra”, which looks like this:
It is closed, and has three holes: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
And the place where the instrument passes should be such that it tightly seals the penis without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary.
And when you see your medicine enter the bladder, put the tip of the cup in the moisture, and draw while it is inside.
If you extract the moisture from the socket, then firmly push the bone back in. The moisture will enter and go to the bladder immediately, causing the patient to feel it.
And this is the form of a subtle enema with which one gives an enema to the bladder:
It is made of silver or brass and has a higher head.
And underneath the shoulder where the ligaments fall.
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a double thread, and warm the pouch with that moisture on the fire.
Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder so that all the moisture enters at once until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it roundly all around. Then put a strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle like an almond, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
And do as you did with the bladder, by pressing in your hand until the moisture comes into the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the ways of stones and their extraction along with medications;
And I have said the difference between the infected stone like gravel, and all the signs, and in which stone one should work by cutting. And in the bladder, and in the penis;
And I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stones which are found in the bladder are more common in children, and this is a sign that the water has leaked from the bladder, similar to water in its subtlety;
And it opens the urethra, and it makes the patient's penis swell, and he urinates frequently, and then it becomes inflamed; And in many of these cases the foundation is lost.
And healing is easy in children up to the age of four, and it is very serious in the elderly, and it is in moderate degree for those who are between youth and old age.
And the treatment is lighter for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the impurities that are in the intestines. Because sometimes it hinders in seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it will jump out from the high place sometimes;
Then have him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely tilted downward;
Then search for it and touch it inside;
If you feel the stone in the area, then quickly proceed to cut into the stone now.
And if it does not fall out from being touched at all, then moisten your finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a grown youth; And it thrusts it into its base, and seeks the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then guide it to the neck of the bladder.
Then press upon it with your finger, and thrust it out from there where you wish to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the place where one makes the incision.
Then insert the catheter there, of which this is the form: And make an incision between that which is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum.
And let it be straight on the stone, and your two thumbs should always be on the base, and the cutting edge should be made so that it is wide outside, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
perhaps the pressure of the thumb on the base will cause it to jump out suddenly without effort.
and know that there are certain stones which have angles and edges: if you cut into them, they can cause injury.
And there are some which lie below, similar to a bean, round, from which the passage is easy.
Therefore, for those with angles and edges, make the cut larger;
and if it does not jump out, then you must use tweezers that are like a file at the end, to pull out the stone so that it does not escape. where you place below it a subtle instrument, curved at the tip
and if you cannot insert it thus, then enlarge the opening of the wound, and if the flesh tears, bind it with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stone, then place the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut into it, then draw it out forcefully, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any more.
And if it is very large, then it must be sewn shut, and make a larger wound. because two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine continuously flows through where the lesion cannot heal.
but nevertheless, strive to extract it, or by breaking with pincers, until you remove it in pieces;
And when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and place on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the hot abscess. Then bind the patient on their neck, and do not unbind the bandage until the third day.
And when you dislocate it, wash very well the place with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of lavender and ointment of basil until it is healed.
And if such abscesses and corrosion occur in the wound, and if blood coagulates in the bladder, causing the urine to be retained in this manner that it does not pass with the urine: then put your finger into the wound and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder.
Then lift the wound of water and oil and silk, and help him in all ways you know until he is healed.
And it is necessary that at every hour you care for him, you tie the two thighs together and gather the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the channel of the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot come out. so that the care I speak of now, that you cut it many times, is released from the cutting by this care. I have already proven so.
Take an iron rod according to this shape, and it should be fitted with three pointed tips at one end:
then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot return into the bladder.
then push the drill into the penis gently, until it reaches the stone; And turn the auger towards your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side;
Soon the urine will come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the bladder. Then it is immediately broken and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
And if you cannot do this because of any obstacle, then tie a thread under the stone and another on top, then make an incision in the bladder where the stone is between the two threads, then pull it out forcefully, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; ‌ And cure him until he is healed.
of the woman's stone
Poc it happens that stones are in women, and if this occurs, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
And the second is that one cannot find a woman well-trained who exposes herself to physicians, especially when she is modest.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this manual art;
And the fourth manner is that the woman's stones are deeper than the man's stones, so it requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessity demands this, then you must take a well-versed midwife, and rarely does one find her, and if you cannot find one, then seek a subtle and modest physician;
And it presents a wise midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and instructs her to do what you command her concerning the investigation of the stone; and looks very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and looks very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must put her finger in the vagina and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, she constrains it under her finger, and recommends that she insert her finger in the vagina of the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand strongly on the bladder.
If she finds it, she must move it little by little from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh;
then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where it is moved and positioned, and you will feel the stone in that part. and do not move your finger on top of the stone or beneath it, and let the first cut be small;
and do not move your finger on top of the stone or beneath it, and let the first cut be small; then insert the reed into the cut, if you feel the stone so narrow the wound that the stone may come out stronger, and know that there are many types of stones.
namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with roots.
If you know the signs, you will know the outcome.
And if the blood overcomes you, apply powdered vitriol to the spot, and keep it there for an hour until the blood is stanched.
Then return to your work until the stone is weakened, and have the instruments that I told you about for the extraction of stones in men to assist you in your work.
And if the blood defeats you and it is from the artery that has been cut, then place the powder on the site and apply a tourniquet and bandages, and do not attempt this again, and leave the stone alone and do not extract it, for fear the patient might die; Then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the place is dry, return to your work until the stone is broken.
Rancid humour is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white sap under the heart of the kidneys that contains the egg.
And it is called "sap", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the egg, so that one might think it is another egg. And this is the skin of the knee among the white tissues which we have mentioned.
And this does not happen unless there is pus. And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness in the testicles, causing that substance to spread.
And sometimes it comes from striking the knee, and this moisture has many colors: where it is a yellowish color or without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens most often;
And these are the signs to recognize this collection, for if it is in the white tissue which we have mentioned, then the abscess is reasonable, and the pus is long like the shape of an egg, and the knee does not open, because there is moisture all around it.
And if there is moisture in the very tissue, then the abscess is reasonable with one part of the egg, and because of this it seems that it is another egg.
And if moisture is between the skin of the legs and the white flesh, it is felt well.
Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the introduced material, from which the form comes before. According to what follows after the intromission, judge what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
then have him lie on his back, on something a little high, and place many blankets under him.
then sit on his left side, and command the attendant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs at the hip.
then take the lancet, and cut the skin of the thighs lengthwise from top to bottom, almost to the bone, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the thighs down to the white flesh, and delicately scrape according to your ability.
Then pierce the sponge full of water with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then place your thumbs, and lift the sponge up.
and do not touch the center of the thumbs, but only the sponge; cut it all or in pieces like this, that if you do not cut well and skillfully, the water will return.
and if the water jumps too much for your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the sponge's work.
then sew the two lips of the thumbs together with a stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the water corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary to bind the vessels that are hanging down, suspecting the flow of blood.
Then cut the testicles with all the suspensory apparatus, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if there is an artery assembled in two parts together, know that these are two arteries; then cut the other part similarly to how you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put moistened wool in rose oil on the wound;
then cut the other part similarly to how you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put moistened wool in rose oil on the wound; and put another moistened wool in wine and oil, and place it on the two testicles, and put double cloths on top, and tie it up tightly all over with the bandage that follows this form:
Then take two cloths, and stuff them with shredded wool according to this appearance and sew them together in the crotch of the breeches, and one end should reach up to the buttocks, and the other to the groin area;
and let the other two heads rest on the two angles, and let all the reinforcement be gathered into the loop of the bridle;
and sometimes this thread is cauterized in place of an iron incision, which is to take a fine, subtle cautery knife, cut the skin of the scrotum, and heat it as we have said, so that the white layer containing the water is exposed;
take the cautery in this form, and pierce that layer at the testicles, and peel it with this heated subtle cautery;
And cut in all ways you can, until you have shaved everything clean;
and be careful that the fire does not touch the testicle;
And know that this work is more effective; And take care to avoid bleeding, and be aware of the operations of surgery;
And if anything goes against you, whether an abscess or bleeding or anything else, then treat what is going against you, according to what was said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to undergo this operation because of its horribleness, then use perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have spoken of that aquatic water is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; Then pierce the abscess in the lower part as wide as possible, and insert the perforation into the length of the body;
And let the holes be wide so that all the water flows freely.
Then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and let the rest of the water drain, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not let the water out at the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to draw water from dropsical patients, as described above.
And widen the opening of the wound, and know that the water will return, and it will collect again after six months or around that time, and when it has collected like before, then the patient will pass his days thus.
Know that in cutting this vessel there is fear in many cases, so it seems better to leave it alone.
And I will tell you about the operation and similarities of the abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the kidneys; and this is very common.
This is to say by excessive acidic and sharp humor that spreads to the kidneys, or from bruising;
and the color of the abscess depends on the body's color; and it feels no pain, yet the abscess is serious;
and sometimes it is a painful and perilous abscess of red color, which can come from a clot in the artery, or an inflammation of the vein.
When it is from a clot in the artery, it is known by the hot state of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; And you must not touch it.
That which is made of a vein inflammation is known by its tendency to express upon the touch of fingers, and one can well make an incision on this appearance, and on other wounds; And it is that you cut the heart of the testicles, then lift up the egg, and draw out the white thread, and free the supporting structure from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already solidified with these wounds, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg and cut it;
And if it is adhering to the thread or that which is inside the vessels, then you must free all of this thread and cut it roundly.
And if the base of the flesh is in the rear place, then you must cut it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other remedies until he is healed.
This is a type of abscess enveloped in an envelope similar to a bud, with the softening of the testicles, and if the patient moves severely while walking;
and the treatment of this disease is almost as frightening as that mentioned above, nevertheless we will tell you about its procedure according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pass the scrotum between your legs, taking all the vessels near the penis, and hold them firmly, and stretch them greatly;
then cut with a broad spatula across the vessels until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the temporal arteries;
Then take a needle with a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein is located, and tie it again at the other end. Then cut them in half straight down, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupting moisture.
Then treat the wound as with others where a bone is broken, so that some vessels are cut which nourish one of the bones.
because this way there is no harm, and if it happens to all the vessels, then the bones must be pulled for all the vessels. so that the bone does not lose its nourishment from the cutting of the vessels, and dries up and cannot help itself.
The happenings of this ramice are by the section that comes in the hypogastrium, or the extension on the belly in the area of the groin, because the intestines descend from that opening to one of the testicles.
And this opening is in the hypogastrium or in its extension, and these two types come from many causes:
Or from a blow, or a jump, or a fall, or from lifting a heavy weight, and by similar things;
And the signs when it is of the extension in the hypogastrium are that it happens gradually, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; And the abscess is equal up to almost its full length, because the hypogastrium presses on the intestines.
And the sign is when it comes from the section of the hip, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess has a diverse appearance, beneath the skin near, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body lacking in the hip area.
And sometimes the coils come out with the intestines and are retained within, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these cures by iron, there is fear, so one must avoid them.
And the manner of working is that you instruct the patient to pull out the intestines with his hand into the wound, if he can reach in. Then have him sit up on his neck. Between your hands, and lift the thighs;
Then press the heart downwards, and cut all the skin of the testicles along their length; Then insert into the flanks of the loins stitches according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the bone can come out;
Then scrape off the tissue that is under the skin of the testicles, until the hard white tissue is exposed on all sides;
Then insert your finger between that which follows the testicle, between the white tissue under the skin of the egg, and the second tissue, and separate that which is behind the egg, and into the second tissue; xspace
And then move to the right hand within the heart of the thighs, and stretch the white silk upward to your left hand, and lift the egg all along the silk towards the waist; And command the assistant to stretch the egg upwards, and untie that which is tied behind the bandage;
And ask your two assistants if there is any intestine wrapped in the white silk, and if you find anything, throw it into the stomach below.
Then take a needle with a thread made of ten threads, and thrust it into the rear part of the silk, which is after the skin of the thighs. After the waist, then cut the threads that appear from the silk, until there are four threads. Then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie there the sinew that we have said is under the skin of the thighs, with a strong cord from two parts. Then wrap the heads with threads and tie them strongly from two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter within, lest an abscess form there. And put back the cord according to the first long cord two fingers from that one, and after these two cords leave hanging the sinew that is under the skin of the thighs by a finger. And then the other according to the roundness that the egg bears.
Then cut in the part which is under the skin of the thighs until the blood runs and flows as we have said before.
Then introduce moistened wool in oil, and put it on wounds, and there introduce the ligature that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white part is cauterized as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of blood loss. For this happens often, and leave the ligature in place until it spontaneously falls off;
And if it delays falling off, then it should be washed with hot water, and put on what we have mentioned, until it falls off;
Then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
of flesh hernia
In this ramus, I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the knot that is together with the string, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut lightly on the bottom side;
Then cut in half and treat the abscess with what is effective until the vessel falls out;
And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the veins, as we have said, and it opens the place;
and none of the intestines come out, and if they do, it is little, and it recovers every hour;
however, if it stays too long in this state, the wound or fistula swells until the intestines come out;
and this happens because of the expansion of the fistula in the veins, as we have said, for it is expanded, then the place becomes soft and swollen and open;
and the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said;
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and the patient should lie on their back between your hands, then strike the swollen area of the dislocation with a width according to the size of three fingers.
then remove the fascia that is under the skin and place the bandage on the visible part of the fascia.
and press firmly on the stomach, then stitch the two visible parts of the fascia on top of the bandage, and sew one to the other.
then remove the bandage and do not strike the fascia or stretch it or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines. Then the treatment through the treatment of wounds.
Then the treatment through the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, so cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
The silk is tight, and has no appearance in the suture, and the cautery is more effective in this place, and closer to health.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Often the skin of the testicles is soft in some men, because the vessels within are relaxed, and it is easy to see.
And it is necessary that when one wants to cure [it], one makes the patient lie on their back, and cut the softened skin onto the natural skin.
Then join the two lips with a single stitch, and if you wish, first sew the excess skin in three or four tight stitches.
Then cut between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
For the incision
Know that castration is condemned in our law, and therefore I would rather not speak of it in this book.
And it is necessary to perform for two reasons:
the first being that the doctor knows how to respond when asked and knows the treatment;
and the second is that we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and deer and other animals.
Therefore, I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction or by incision.
In the method we perform by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them with your hand as far as they can go and until you no longer feel them.
About the castration of size: It is necessary that you dye the beast, and press its skin against your left hand, then tie the string, and strike on each hoof with one blow, when you have well skinned them;
and leave any pouch of fat or the subtle fat that is over the vessel;
and this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, because in attraction some parts of the skin may remain, which causes the beast to desire lust;
then heal the wound until it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism occurs in men in two ways: one is that between the two testicles appears something similar to the natural figure of a woman, where there is hair, and sometimes urine flows from it.
And the other method is for women, and it is placed on the wrist like a rod and two cubits long.
And the treatment for both men and women is such that you cut the cartilages close together, and treat them like other wounds.
In the second method, for men whose urine flows through the skin of the scrotum, there is no treatment.
A tonsure is a cartilage close together on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
You should dye the excess of the tonsure with your hand or scissors, and cut it lightly;
and do not go too deep, lest blood comes out, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And for another type that is born at the mouth of the womb, and it swells, and perhaps it jumps strongly, and it resembles a cow, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease". If it is necessary, you must cut it off, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it heals.
It is erratic when the woman's nature is not understood, or the opening is small; and it is either a natural birth defect, or an accident caused by illness that has occurred.
and it is either a natural birth defect, or an accident caused by illness that has occurred. Or it is due to a nearby object, or from subtle or thick smoke, and it is formed in the womb, either on one side, or below, or wherever. )))
And it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps even menstruation.
And the knowledge of this comes from the examination by the healer.
If the swelling is imminent, it will appear at your thumb or foot.
If it is of subtle syrup, and it is near two pounds, then hasten, and let them be like this:
Place your two thumbs together, and let the woman be on her back, with her legs spread.
Then weigh out the two pounds firmly, so that the subtle syrup is round, and cover it well.
Then take wool, soak it in oil, and place it on the spot, and let the woman lie down every day, so that it may not heal.
And if the syfac is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula similar to a myrtle leaf.
If the covering is of fresh meat, then suspend it at the knee and cut into it.
And have the medicines that staunch blood, such as agrimony, dragon's blood, frankincense, together with plenty of egg. xspace
then bring a broad lead plate, so that the wound cannot close.
and let it be so for a long time, and bring him a tent of dry linen;
then he should be treated with other treatments until he is healed.
And when in the flesh comes a boil, it must be covered in this manner, if it is not an infected abscess. For an infected abscess that is in the flesh, one should not touch or make with fire.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually appear without a cause, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard;
and we have already said in the section the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and hardened ones, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh and do not appear to the touch, are not cured by fire.
Those who are at the edge of death, which can be felt, are those whom one can cure.
Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house. Then press down on it with pliers and cut off its roots, then powder medicines that restrain blood flow, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
Then he puts his feet against the wall for an hour, then places them in cold water.
And if blood comes out, then she makes her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galls and similar things, and then takes barley flour, and mixes it with honey and oil, and makes an emplaster on her back.
And if it bleeds, that is good. If not, she has him aerate cupping glasses on his back and breasts without piercing the skin.
Then she takes linen, moistens it with plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and aerates in place.
And when the abscess subsides, she treats the place with oil until it is healed;
And that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp head, so you must cover it as I have said for the telul. And then heal until it is healed.
Many types of abscess occur in the uterus, such as canker, purulent abscess, herpes, cysts, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
It must therefore be said in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes to the breast, which is not one of the abscesses that swell well.
And if you wish to know the ironwork, look whether the abscess is sharp at its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red, if you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the abscess ripen until the pain is relieved;
And then make the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs where he leans back, and support his back and bring together his feet at the outer parts of the thigh;
And let his thighs be spread wide, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good cord;
Then give him to drink towards the right side, and bring there the instrument with which one works the opening of the wound, from which afterward comes the form;
And it is necessary that when you see this instrument being brought there, that you first insert the ray to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not injure the patient; And if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths so that the instrument does not hurt it;
And it is necessary for him to place the horn of the instrument above, and to dip the instrument.
And when the abscess opens, and one makes an opening with the soft hand, it must be covered at the top with spongy cloth.
And when the abscess is emptied, it is necessary that you place in the wound tents moistened in rose oil, or in dry green oil.
And place the tent further into the wound at the bottom of the sore, and place over the sore and over the finger a clean cloth moistened in water or cooked mallows.
Then the care after two days of oil application to this extent, until it is healed.
and sometimes one lifts the scab and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then with water and long roots of iris and elecampane cooked; then return to oil application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.
of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell air.
then quickly the child is about to issue forth; therefore know that this birth is according to natural form, and the outlet is under its head, and the afterbirth with it.
And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his belly, so that the child comes out quickly.
because when he descends upon his head, the afterbirth follows with him, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses by good cleansing.
and this one who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Because sometimes he comes feet first, and sometimes the body or head comes out strongly, or the hands, or he comes out on his back, or sometimes upside down, and by chance he is turned onto his neck, and in other evil forms.
so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these things, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms how she must help him.
If a child comes out headfirst by natural birth, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool, where women hold her.
and let some oil or fenugreek be cooked, then the midwife puts between her teeth the small spoon which has this shape: and tear open the afterbirth, and cut to her nail so that the moisture inside flows out;
and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must enema the woman with fenugreek muslin mixed with sesame oil;
then make her inhale and sneeze condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: If one extracts the child now.
And if the two hands come out strongly, then you must reset them gently piece by piece; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high; then take away the seat from under her, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during this process.
And if the hand cannot enter and the child is dead, then cut off the hands with a knife that was placed before, extract the child, and reset accordingly.
of the child's exit onto its feet When the child comes out on its feet, one must push it upwards; and then turn him little by little until he is even.
Then take hold of his feet and stretch them little by little.
When he can jump up to his knees, have him grasp it and sneeze with condiments. if he jumps further, so be it by God's will.
And if he does not jump as high as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is according to the natural figure. Because then he will be light.
And if he does not come further as we have said, then take mace from an almond tree, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything together in a mortar. apply this ointment over the woman's genital area and on the outside as well. Then make her sit in hot water up to her ribs.
and when she is sufficiently moistened below, give her a mustard plaster and place it below, leaving it on for an hour. Then make her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and press lightly on her belly, for the child jumps now.
Of the delivery of the child upon its knees When the child comes in this form, then the midwife places her hands little by little; and she is made to sit on his neck, and her feet hang down, and she lies on the bed. and folds her hands little by little, and then takes hold of the hands on top of the belly, and removes the cushions from below, so that she is ready to descend. And if the child does not jump, then take his feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands in. And feed the child little by little; And instruct the woman to take [care] until the child comes out.
Of the delivery of the child that comes with one hand hanging down It is necessary to devise a method to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman get up and walk;
If she cannot walk, then have her lie down on a bed, and spread her legs widely;
Then bring the midwife that I mentioned;
and if she does not deliver, have her sit on a stool, then consider how to bring back the hand. and feed the child according to natural figure, and make him sneeze, and instruct her to take [care] until the child comes out strongly.
of the emergence of the child from its neck, and its hands extended, and its face turned towards the back of its mother It is necessary that the nurse wash their hands, then turn the cup little by little, and pour gently.
And when it is equal, place on the natural mixture of althea and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move little by little.
And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat and command that she rest. And make her sneeze. In this same manner, for all the second stage
In this same manner, for all the second stage When the mucus comes out in this manner to all the nostrils, then cut the nostril with your nail until the moisture is emptied.
And if the child cannot breathe through its face and neck, then cut from below, so that it is not retained, and let the child die.
then put the child inside, as much as you need to place it, and instruct the woman to take some time:
of the birth of twins Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born. And this is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely. Two is a strange thing, and they do not live, except rarely; 》
Two is a strange thing, and they do not live, except rarely; 》 I know that being multiple is a defect, and they are deprived of the fluid that divides them, which is connected to the belly; 》 》
And sometimes they come out as naturally as any other, as we have said.
And if they come out violently, then treat it as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and do quickly and lightly what she does; And make sure to do this as if you are going for safety. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and all are shaped like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one, and it is necessary that the midwife knows all these things, for by chance similar things may happen to her; And do so according to what is needed.
of the dead child
When you cure the woman of a dead child or miscarriage, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out on its own, and you are forced to work with your hands; Then you must know if the woman is of sound virtue, and does not have an illness or fear of death.
So it must happen that the woman is placed on her back, and her head inclined downward, and her legs raised.
And let the midwife apply the tincture in two places, where she is bound to the bed so that she cannot move during childbirth.
Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moistened oil, blended with althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then let the midwife anoint her hands with these oils and herbs.
Then gently insert them into the pregnant woman, then seek the place where she inserts the unguents so that they may be suitable for this purpose, and take care that the child is prepared to descend onto its head.
If he thrusts the dagger in his eyes or his neck or his mouth or under his palate or beneath the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descent is on the feet, then he should thrust in the sole or in the sides.
and it is necessary that he holds the dagger in his right hand, and places the handle between his left thumb and forefinger, and strikes with all his might, and thrusts the dagger into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space;
Then thrust against another dagger, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal.
And then they are made equal by moving to and fro, so that the bone may issue forth, and let the claws be toothed to hold it, as in this form.
And if some part remains, then let the surgeon anoint two of his fingers with oil and push them into that part, and draw out the other part;
And if nothing remains, then place this claw in a higher location, and do the same until all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to swelling, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it all comes out. Then cut it into the joint of the sole or at the heel, and so you must do with the other hand and both feet.
And if the head of the child is large and it is narrow at the exit, or if there is sharp water collected at the head, then you must insert a pointed catheter between your fingers, puncture the head, and extract the water. or you can use an instrument called "almidach", with which the forms come with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
and do the same if the child naturally has a large head.
and then draw the bones with forceps, and if the head jumps out strongly and sticks in the birth canal, it should be split until the moisture that is in the worst exit comes out.
and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as you can;
And if he is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce him so that the moisture runs out.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mother's mouth is easy.
And if he is constricted in the belly or in the breast, then you must stretch him on a cloth wrapped around your hand. and cut open the belly or the breast, so that the moisture within runs out.
and if the other members are removed, and only the head remains, then the surgeon should insert his hand into the wound deeply, and pull it out until it reaches the mouth of the wound. Then he places one or two sponges therein, and pulls them out strongly.
And if the mouth of the wound is constricted due to a hot abscess that has formed there, then one must not work on it, but rather apply moist and greasy substances. And let the physician prepare poultices, and boil them in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is on his side, and you can place him flat, then prepare as we have said for a living child;
And if one cannot, then draw out the cord piece by piece, and leave nothing of the membrane.
And when you have done this, let the physician prepare what we have said for abscesses that come in marriage;
And if blood discharge occurs, then place it in restraining water, and let the physician prepare other treatments.
And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had died, and then another was conceived on top of it, and that other also died. After a long time, he developed an abscess on the thigh, which swelled until it burst, and began to exude greatly.
I was called to treat it, and thought about it for a long time, but the wound could not be healed.
I applied a strong drawing plaster, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one. I was greatly amazed, for the belly has no bones at all.
So I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
I sought the wound, and removed many bones, until the woman was in a better state; And the woman lived for a long time thus, and always exuded a little pus from the place.
And I have not written this chapter except that, when the master finds something strange, he should know how to help it.
Here follows the form of the pressing instrument, with which we treat the books;
and at two turns, as the two heads of the two screws. However, let the horn be more delicate than the press, and let it be made of boxwood or ivory;
and let the mouth of the stock be two fingers wide, and the edge of the boards one finger thick, and in length a palm and a half. and between the two screws there should be two supports of this same wood, which are firmly attached to one another, half a palm long or a little more.
And these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the horseshoe to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, similar to the shape of tongs; and it must have two adjustments at each end, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide;
and when you want to open the horseshoe with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging and legs spread, then place the two adjustments together in the horseshoe, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs; then work your hand with the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to the amount that you want to open the mouth of the horseshoe, until the hole is made as wide as you wish.
These instruments are all surpassed, and their likenesses are multiplied. And when the doctor has prepared them, the work is all the more urgent, and higher in reputation among people because of their quantity.
Do not discard the instrument until you have prepared it, for their needs are not negligible.
When the secondine is used for childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze strongly, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose. And if she faints from this, that's a good sign.
If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cascara, and centaury. all these herbs, or some of them, be cooked in water on the fire;
then put a reed or tube from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and hold it until the steam enters the patient's mouth;
then make them sneeze, as we have said. If the ligament is cut quickly.
And if it persists after this treatment and does not diminish, command the woman to wet her left hand in oil of cumin or a poultice of hollyhock, and then place it on the vulva, and seek for the discharge; and when she finds it, take hold of it and pull straight and little by little, so that the patient does not shrink from the extraction;
But one must move it gently to the right and to the left, then pull. It will come out and dislocate again.
And if the throat is narrow, we have said that the treatment is to sneeze, and with smoke from herbs;
and if it does not come out with all that we have said, be careful not to pull too hard.
but it is necessary that what is at the throat, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then give her an enema with ointment quadruple. It will rot and be reset, and it will come out stronger.
but still, when it rots, it causes a bad smell in the stomach and head, and harms the patient. It is necessary therefore for suitable fumigation for this.
none of the ancients have proven fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flow and the afterbirth is this:
And it is like vinegar, and place the subtle part at the top, and the wide parts over the fire.
and let the fumigation be above the coals, and continue until it is consumed, and then begin another one.
Many children are born who do not have their anus pierced, but instead have a thin membrane covering it: so it is necessary for the midwife to pierce this membrane with her finger, and do not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and be careful that she does not touch the wound.
then put on a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with poultice until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put a piece of lead in the hole and leave it for less days, and let it be removed when the child wants to go into rooms.
And sometimes this happens suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that quickly: if it is treated, as we have said about the poplar bud.
Fistulas that come from under the anus are knots, and growths that come near the anus outside, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or several;
and when that knot is old, it works, and it brings with it moisture, white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
And they are known by this: that there is an emission or flatulence when the patient has an emission, and sometimes one comes out as a fart.
And there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and reach as far as the junction of the thigh, and even to the head of the testicle.
And thus one recognizes a fistula penetrating the anus and not penetrating it: and this is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when it is not twisted.
And if there is twisting, then insert a fine lead tent or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
And if you do not feel it, and there is no passage of feces or gas or bile, as we have said: know that it has not perforated; then hasten to cure [it].
Et when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the passage of the urine, then the urine leaks out, and it cannot be healed by medicine.
If it is perforated as far as the junction of the thigh, the tent will come to that place; if there is no twist and the discovery of pain around it, then it exits soon after, and neither medicines nor stitching through poultice are effective;
And in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except for labor, and the vanity of foolish doctors who meddle with them.
In those that are not Persian and are not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
And he lifts his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly. Then place an iron tent or of lead if there is convulsion, so that you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, if you then feel that the tent has passed through.
And let it be uncovered where you sense between your finger the spleen or the flesh, then know that it is perforated. If it cannot be treated, then do not bother with it.
Nevertheless, it is said that some can be well healed, but this happens rarely.
And aid is done by heating the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before. and presses it all hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the anus; and do this two or three times, so that you know these fleshy tissues are burned, which are like a bird's feather.
and then cure it with moist tents in butter, so that this flesh comes out, then cure with a salve of healing herbs and binding.
If he is thus healed, that is good.
If this, otherwise cannot be cured;
and if the tent enters, and does not reach to the finger in the anus, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula like this which follows the covering of the heart. If from the beginning of the fistula, and always push forward the tent, and then after the cautery, until it comes to the head of the tent. And the tent will be released and fall;
Then shave off those hairs that appear like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
And if the pus overcomes you and enters between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or strong medicine.
For the fire cautery brings together two good things: That is to say, the burning of these hairs, and the staunching of blood and drying out of moisture.
Then treat moist tents with butter or ground substance, until the place swells up, and the burned hairs come out of the swelling.
then cure the wound with sudorific onions and hard flesh, and the medicines are dry.
When it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula reaches to the bottom of the anus and is distant from the body, then press your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent and inside there are either the fabric or the tarpaulin or the wood which is about to rot, then let there be only air that comes from faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the bottom, or if you can do so place tents there and treat as before.
and do not go too deep, lest you cut the support that holds the foundation, and the discharge comes out there unwillingly. then treat it as we have said.
then treat it as we have said. par aventure si sera sanez, or you remove that covering and clean it once it is cut near the base, either by probing or with another suitable instrument; then cleanse that foul matter which is in the wound, as much as you can; then strive to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in the part below the base;
then strive to restore the wound and to stop the fistula in the part below the base; if it would be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are of this kind: and it is when you probe the fistula, and it is on the side of the base near the skin above, then take a probe pierced at the tip like this: ️ And insert a twisted thread into it, and insert the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the tip.
If it is passing through the edge of the base within, then draw out the thread from that hole, as you push your finger into the base;
And pull the thread end, and bring the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one day or two.
And restrain it several times, so that the thread cuts through the flesh between them, and they fall off;
then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Si la fistule ne perce pas, fais-la percer de toutes les manières possibles, sauf si elle est trop profonde. For it is not fitting to cover the wound too deeply with a cap, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the sharp spine used to make a fistula is very sharp and cutting on one side; and not on the other side, so that it does not cut what should not be cut, as you can see here.
Embryos are according to two kinds: or they are within the anus, like a grain of resin, and there are small ones and large ones, and it often bleeds, and there is one or more, and they are outside the anus and at the top of the anus.
Mais celles qui sont defuer ainsi ont peu de moiteur, et encore toujours ou un peu d'eau citrine ou un peu de sang, et elles ont la couleur du corps.
et le cure de celles qui les ont dedans le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malade qu'il s'essuie pour aller dans les chambres, jusqu'à ce que le fondement lui issu fuer, et que les fils apparaissent; si tu t’empresses, et le prends avec des pinces, ou tu le tiens avec ton ongle, puis le coupes à sa racine.
et si les pinces ne peuvent pas les tenir à cause de leur moiteur, alors les prends avec un morceau de tissu, ou du coton, ou une pièce de chiffon. And draw them to your teeth, then cut them off, and sprinkle some hot powders on top for the cautery; And cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat with other treatments until they are healed;
And if the base cannot come out, then use an enema for the patient with a biting and harsh enema to clean what is in the base, so that it can come out clearly; When the patient presses, and if the threads are out of the base, then the treatment is light;
When the patient presses, and if the threads are out of the base, then the treatment is light; And it is that you take them with your nail or with pliers, and cut them off, then treat as we have said until they are healed, and let the patient fear the cutting with iron. It is necessary for you to suture according to this manner:
It is necessary for you to suture according to this manner: Take a twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then pull the thread through the other side and make the needle pierce from another place, and turn the two ends of the thread underneath the needle, and let it be wide;
And pull the thread tightly, then tie a knot in the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood;
then place on top a damp cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerate, and place it on top, and instruct the patient to rest;
And then let them alone until they fester, and when they have fallen off, treat the wounds with ointment and other treatments, until they are healed.
Of dryness of the intestines or rectum Many times there is dryness in the intestines, due to natural constraint, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help. Si it is necessary that you remove with the tip of a scalpel or with your nail the scab on top, which does not let it moisten; then treat it until it heals as needed;
and if it cannot heal, then begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well and is scabbed over. then treat it until it is healed.
Of trembling A formica is a small hairy appearance under the skin, and it goes very deep;
and sometimes it finds the cold, and one feels it also as if dead from trembling, and it comes to the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is that you take a quill of a goose feather, or a strong feather of a vulture, and place that quill on the trembling, so that the circle encloses the trembling all around. Then turn your hand to the entire chain until you capture all around the trembling, and place it entirely, and pull out the trembling from its roots.
And if you see, do this with a reed of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be subtle below and drawn above: Do not cut, in order to hold onto two, and press harder.
And if you see it, then cauterize the trembling, just as it is written in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes a silver enema or arsenic or melted bronze or iron can be made;
and sometimes these instruments are made in small and large sizes according to those for whom they are prepared. Therefore, those who are prepared for the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Therefore, those who are prepared for the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small. The form of the small and large enema is wide at the top, where the intestines are tied in this manner:
And if there is an obstruction where the intestines are tied as you see, and the end is pierced;
And on one side, let there be two holes, and on the other side, one.
And let the belly where the medicines are placed be made from a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be one finger's width between each hole. Then insert into these holes a strong thread of twisted linen, crossing in an X shape or around the belly, and gather the belly together like a goatskin; And when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread at the front, then administer an enema.
And this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold. Anoint the tip of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or a similar substance, then insert it gently. Then the servant squeezes it with both his hands until it is all clear, then he releases the enema, and the patient lifts his legs to the wall, and if the medication wants to come out, he holds it as much as he can; And if he sleeps through the night, it is even greater help.
And if you enema him for a disease of the swollen belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the rectum, let the enema be as fine as for a one-year-old child;
and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the leather should be stretched:
We have already said in the section on the treatment of wounds;
or we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines according to their uses.
I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and what they are made of.
The things by which wounds are made are by the throwing of a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or by spear or staff or arrow, or similar things.
and which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members.
And I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because their treatment will be discussed in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from the throwing of a stone or similar things, and the skin is also torn and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess. If you do this immediately, heal with the cephalic method even if there is a little blood from the wound, and let the healing be opposite to the injured part;
and the patient should avoid eating too much wine and heavy food.
And if he does not want to heal, let his food be reduced, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
and place on the wound, if abscesses come there, only cotton soaked in rose oil or in stiptic wine.
and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and not moved by air, powder that I will mention a little later.
And if fire has moved it, then apply some poultices until he is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by sewing, as I will say for wounds of the belly, with the seam.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and gaping, and only holds on by one spot, then chop it off; then treat the wound with medicine and replace hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods such as heads and cooked wheat, also like beans, and similar things.
And if you find rotting flesh and it reaches the bone, then cut off all the rot and cast it away, then treat it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, from which blood cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then bind it with a thread. And if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and it is that you put this powder in before the fire has moved it.
And the manner of the powder is: take one part frankincense; blood of dragon two parts; quicklime three parts, and make it into fine powder, and fill the wound, and hold it firmly until it becomes well-attached and joins all its blood.
and then bind it well, and leave it without unbinding, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with only quicklime, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but the fire has moved the wound.
And if the wound has moved due to heat,
but put on some poultices made of barley flour mixed with water and honey, until it casts out the pus; then continue with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the fracture of the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
and I will tell you later about the fractures of the skull.
of a neck wound
If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the sinew of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is a nerve, then there is no other device than to leave the wound alone and not put anything constricting on it, because this harms the nerves and causes them to withdraw; And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be hot, like warm water mixed with rose oil, and wash the wound also in warm water, and other stones of similar manner, and moist dressings.
And if the wound is large, stitch it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and full of pus, then puncture it in a lower place.
And if the artery is cut and blood flows out, then restrain it, bind it, and cauterize if necessary.
And if the esophagus or the heart is cut and the passage is blocked so that food cannot pass, then suture the heart onto the spine of the neck, and do not touch the throat but replace it according to its natural shape. And then he holds it gently, and leaves it for some days, then treats it with dried onions until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then he searches for it; And if there are bone fragments, then draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound rots, and is discharged and the exit cleared.
And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound and it has an abscess, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a thrust from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then observe if wind is coming out of the wound as the patient breathes: Know then that the wound is mortal;
And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not apply the powder at the first hour, nor bandage it, for fear that the wound may bleed profusely, return to the heart, and kill the patient. But apply an attractive ointment to it, and bind it twice a day.
And if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more. Thus, no spasm, trembling, heart strangeness, or drunkenness will come to him. And when you see the good arrangement, know that the wound is saved. Heal it then with bandages and other treatments until he is healed;
And if she cannot heal and works again, know that there is a fistula.
If the treatment is done as it should be. And if the wound is from the incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, either on the back or behind, treat it as you would one in front. If it is large, with stitches;
And if it is small, with powder. And if it is close to the bone and has chipped off pieces, clean the wound and remove the splinters if they are loose. And if they are not cauterized, let the wound suppurate, which will ease the extraction;
And for other wounds and other limbs, the judgment is the same as we have said.
From the rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the abdomen are great, moderate, and small;
from the great wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines protrude, which causes their penetration.
And the suture is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is harder to put the intestines back in, unless they are replaced immediately.
because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, and are harder to put back in, which is why the moderate wound is better, because it is easier to return the intestines to their place than with others.
And know that the ruptures of the belly are according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly, and the sutures of other wounds of the body are two others which are common to other wounds;
And nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small and some part of the intestine has come out, and it is a serious thing to put back, this is by one of the two methods: Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Soak a sponge or cloth in warm water only, where you cook in hot water with hyssop and saffron and spikenard, and wash the intestines until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes make this restraining wine, which should be drunk alone to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling diminish, then moisten the intestines with water where mallows and marshmallows have been cooked, for through this the intestine is healed in a short time.
and if it cannot enter, then make an incision in the wound with the instrument used to cut out hemorrhoids;
and the first treatment is that the intestine should be eaten, which no one should cut into unless there is great necessity.
And this is the tool to cut it:
if you cut inside at an angle and not outside, and see here the shape: And when the wound is widened, and the intestine jumps out, then place it back in its natural form in its proper place, if you can, because this is worth more.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, then you must make the patient lie on his back, and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then put the head and the feet higher than the parts below, and also if there is a turn of the belly in one of the two parts, then pay attention to this: that the injured part be higher than the other;
And thus it is necessary to proceed as I say for large and medium wounds.
In small wounds, apply what is prepared, then have between your hands one skillful minister who holds all the turn at his hand, and gather the lips;
And this is the common way of stitching, which is that you take a needle or several, according to the width of the wound, then leave two fingerbreadths from the top of the wound, and there you insert a needle with a strong thread. and pierce the two heads of the leather with the two heads of the thread, which is underneath the leather inside, so that you make it pierce from this side, and join the two heads of the thread together.
then pull a double thread around the needle on two sides, then join the two heads of the wound together, and leave two fingerbreadths, and insert another needle there.
Then take the thread of the needle just as you made the first needle, and do not stop making them according to your need for needles, until all the wound is restricted.
And let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick, because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well. Therefore, they must be medium-sized.
And it is not necessary to insert the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and widen the wound before the suturing.
And then cut the heads of the needles, so that they do not wound the patient while sleeping, and put caps or bandages on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it allows a needle or two.
The second stitch is common and consists of assembling the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the flesh together with one needle with a strong, medium-sized thread.
And when you have passed these four heads all together, then bring the needle back to the place where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes.
And leave a space between each stitch the thickness of two small fingers.
This stitch men know, and I sewed a wound that one man had in the belly, who was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it protruded the intestines well two palms long, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I returned the intestines to him after they had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound was closed until fifteen days, and I cared for it, and he was healed.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
And I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. And I put old cotton on the wound twice a day, and I washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing.
Take the needle, and pass it from the outside to the inside.
When it has pierced the skin straight on straight, leave the end of the silk or thread where you passed the needle on the outside, and make it come out on the other side from the inside to the outside.
And the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs, and that you leave one time the thread on one side, and take it up again from another, until the stitch is completely finished.
The second way of stitching, which Galen properly calls, is done like some do, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the thread to the other end, in this manner:
Insert a needle into one end of the thread close by, and make it pass through that place only, and leave the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it pass from the outside part until inside, to the two ends of the thread;
Then have one pierced from the outside part to the other inside, in two other places of the temple that are on either side.
And this is the method of suturing and it is the most common.
Galen said these words, and some attest to it, that the belly should be sewn with two needles, with thread in each.
And one needle must be pushed from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps.
And know that when the wound is in the middle of the belly, the suture is more difficult than from other parts of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before heat has moved it, then set aside burning the interior, and the skin.
then apply powder of stag beetle, and if heat has moved it, then apply some ointment that is present, until the wound heals. and stitch the threads, and let the silk and the thread be joined together; then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
and if you do not have medicine, then apply, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicine in many situations when the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound will affect the main limbs, then you must soak a light linen cloth in temperate oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits.
And if he feels pain or putrefaction in the belly, and this often happens, then enema him with lukewarm black wine, and likewise if the putrefaction reaches the intestines.
And pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the entrails come out of the wound, then push them back in just like the intestines, while they are still fresh.
And if it is old and turned black or dark, then you must tie the black area so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is between the ligaments, and place the two ends hanging from the lower part of the wound until enough to lighten the extraction when the projectile falls, and the wound heals.
of the bursting of a boil
When the intestines are cut and the wound is small, it can be healed in some men, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, from which came the excretions and flatulence.
I applied care according to my ability, and did not stop refining until he was healed, and the place was joined together.
And when I saw it join, I feared that the patient might have an ailment in his belly; and there was no illness there, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking;
and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take forceps with large jaws, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the forceps has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips, so that it closes its mouth upon them;
and then cut off its head, and this holds so that it cannot come undone, then place another forceps in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is fully seized; And cut the wound.
If the heads enter the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, one can tie off the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal, in this manner:
Take the head of this intestinal thread that is very thin, and then tie a fine twisted linen thread to the head of this thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestines, and bring it back to its proper place;
And this manner of suturing for wounds is nothing but according to the way of confidence and hope;
And if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestinal grooves, there is no cunning or skill, except for subtlety.
of a fistula wherever it may be You should know that any wound or abscess, when it bursts open, is universally called a "fistula," and likewise when it is incised and discharges pus.
And a fistula is according to the truth a hard and white nodule, where one does not feel pain, and it is also rooted like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in clear fluid, and other times thick. sometimes deep, and other times shallow;
and I have already spoken of it in the section on wounds, that any wound that does not heal, and there is no flesh there, it is only due to one of the NINE causes: that is to say, because of the weakness of the blood or body; ︎ or because of its evil nature; or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the edges, which does not allow new flesh to grow; where there is too much flesh; where the place is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a kind of plague; or because in that region, digestion is slow, healing is delayed, and swelling is natural; or there are veins or bones there:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of a fistula caused by manual work.
Know that a fistula can occur in any part of the body; because there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or from the sinus, or the intestines, or the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; And so for those who come to the property of the main limb, and to similar places.
And all fistulas that are of this kind are of severe curing, and there is only labor and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have mentioned, and you are confident in the cure, and you recognize it, then take a needle of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, then prick it.
And if the fistula is crooked, then seek out a subtle needle of lead, for lead bends more easily around the crookedness.
And if the fistula has multiple holes and you cannot easily locate it with needles, then administer an enema through one of the holes, for moisture thus cuts from one hole to another, and cleanses it.
Then carefully seek with your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it has been severed completely, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels at the pressing of your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foreign body and the rotten flesh that are inside;
and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep in a straight place, then you must cut deeply, as much as you can, then put wet bandages soaked in healing water on it, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
And then he applies onion-like dressings to clean flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it as we have said; and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off.
If a vein or nerve injures a principal member, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then scrape until all the corruption is removed, then treat with flesh-like dressings until it is healed.
and if it does not heal and pus forms again as before, know that you have not yet reached the end.
then expose and seek until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
And if it is healed this way, it is good. But if not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a little bit of bone corrupted and you can remove it with tweezers, then remove it with the appropriate instrument for that purpose; and if there are many bones, then remove them all, leaving none behind;
And if moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, then cut and remove the flesh and skin, and free the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place something that induces putrefaction on the wound and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will be easier to obtain;
And if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then remove the flesh only up to the blackness, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of corruption, reaching as far as the marrow of the bone; then it must be sawn and cut all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed.
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take an example and help in your work.
There was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from something inside the body, so that the matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to open it. ething
but the doctors in their folly worked so much on it that they opened the abscess, and a lot of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and many perforations appeared, all of which released pus and moisture from the body;
and many doctors tried to cure it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine until I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what came out through the perforations was very foul-smelling; and the body of the young man became red, and he had a yellowish color.
Je pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one came up against another from all parts of the leg.
I hurried then, and I cut into one of the perforations until I uncovered a part of the bone, and I found it corrupt and decayed, and the corruption reached as far as the inside of the bone;
I saw that the bone was rotten, and I thought there was no other corruption except for what I removed.
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, but it could not heal.
and then I reopened [the wound], and discovered the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, and saw it, and then removed it, and tried to close the place. but I could not do so until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and then drew it out completely, then treated it with medicines. and it was quickly healed and closed, and I did not need to reopen the wound except for the weakness of the patient, who could not tolerate [it], and out of fear that I would cause his death. Car for the evacuation of blood, he often bled, but he was entirely healed, and in place of the bone, hard flesh grew, and it was of good disposition and caused no harm or opposite effect at all, neither going nor coming.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: Take a ligature, and tie it to the end of the bone that is protruding, and command someone to pull it upwards; and put another ligature of thicker linen on top of the first ligature, and tie it onto the flesh that is above the bone, and pull upwards so that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and expose the flesh in the place where you want to set the bone, so that the suture does not injure the flesh;
and place a heated iron or board under the bone to completely cover the corrupted flesh;
and it is necessary to set [the bone] as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to set [it] again another time.
And if the bone is rotten, and does not open, and the rot is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
Then place the ember underneath, and then let there be silk from one part to the other of the rot, and let the length of the silk be equal to the length of the rot, as we have said.
And if the rot is in the joint, then cut away the rotten joint, and silk the bone on which it adheres from the other side.
And if the rot is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut it out.
And if the rot is in the wrist of the hand or in the ankle of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nevertheless you must seek out that rot and see how it opens. And cleanse it in all ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you.
And know that the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and their fineness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it is necessary to prepare for each kind of work its instrument.
And know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the kinds of diseases. If you think about the instrument of which you have need according to what is necessary for it.
The head swells either from within or from without;
and when you have treated that corruption with the care of medicines, and they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death or the greater harm of the loss of the limb.
and the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burned by fire, and then swells after the blackening, for this corruption of the limb spreads from limb to limb, and affects the entire body.
if you are quick to cover it, and if it is due to the bite of some poisonous animals, such as a sea scorpion or viper, and similar things, if the corruption is at the base of the finger, then cut it off, and do not give it space to spread to the hand.
And if it goes up to the hand, then cut it at the joint, so that the corruption does not spread to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, then cut it with a knife;
and if it goes beyond the knife, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of his strength.
and do likewise when the corruption comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to the foot, then cut off the entire foot. and if it goes up into the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other strategy than to leave the patient to die.
And the manner of the cut or of the silk member is such that you tie it above and below, and one assistant extends one end of the ligature downwards, and another assistant the other ligature upwards, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ligatures in a place one finger wide, until the bone is exposed;
then cut or silk, and place on each side a piece of linen, so that the silk does not touch the healthy flesh, and cause the patient to have another wound and abscess there.
And if blood flows as you work, then quickly cauterize the place, or apply some restraining powders on it.
then return to your treatment until it is complete, then bind the injured member with a suitable ligature, and care for it until it is healed.
Et je te dirai que cela arriva à un homme dans son pied.
Il lui advint une tache noire qui ressemblait à une brûlure de feu, et cette corrosion commença d'abord dans son gros orteil du pied, jusqu'à ce qu'elle envahisse tout le pied.
Et quand l'homme vit la corruption, il se hâta de couvrir le pied, et fut guéri.
Et longtemps après, la corruption revint dans le gros orteil de la main. Il vint à moi, et je lui appliquai des remèdes répulsifs après avoir nettoyé le corps, mais il ne put arrêter la corruption.
Et il demanda que je lui coupe la main, ce que je refusai car j'espérais encore pouvoir repousser la matière. And I doubted also that if I cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak.
And he despaired completely, and returned to his land, and struck his hand with a sword, and was healed;
And I have not told this account except for what one must do if needed elsewhere.
Sometimes an abscess comes in a fleshy place and stays so long that it makes a large gathering of pus. And then they round and pierce, and the pus jumps out, and the place remains empty, like a vessel. And the skin above is as thin as fine cloth, and it does not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such an illness is called «sain», and is not called «fistula».
But if it is so elongated that it comes up to the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
and the skin is such that you cut around all of that skin, even when it is thin, like a sheet; and it does not become infected due to its corruption.
And if you are confident that the skin will become infected, and the infection is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clyster in this manner:
look to see if the breast is large, and the discharge from it is of foul odor, then treat it with a clyster made of Egyptian medicine thus: take asafoetida, and oil, and lead oxide, equally, and put them to cook in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
And then take some according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and use it as an enema in the breast, and constrain the anus; And leave the medicine inside for two hours, then remove it by pressing out.
Do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the pus removed.
And sometimes use an enema of ash water when this medicine is not present, and it should be that you take ashes from a vine stick, pour water over them, then filter, and use as an enema until you know the breast is well cleaned.
And if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then enema with honey and water where there is a little bit of lead. ou you clean it with honey and mixed wine, so that the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the wound dry.
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the wound is well purified, then you cleanse it with that which produces flesh in it. It is that you take a definitive plaster and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties in the section on ointments;
and if the hole in the wound is small and the tip of the syringe cannot enter, then widen it with an iron hook slightly, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilic ointment until it is widened.
And if the wound is too wide, then cut it and leave only as much in place so that the suppository can enter, and if the opening through which the bowel exits is above, then cut it or move it to a lower place.
and if you cannot cut the skin as you see fit, then prepare it in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place there is, for when the bowel is fully out, do not let any flesh enter; and if you cannot cut the skin as you see fit, then prepare it in this manner: so that the bowel runs lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowel there;
so that the bowel runs lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowel there; And take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and place them on a linen cloth that covers all the wound. Then cut a piece of cloth the size of the wound and a little larger than before, then place a soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and put it on the wound to relieve the pain, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days.
And the one that is on the wound, remove often to relieve the pain, and know what comes out of the pain, whether it is poison or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested.
And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in this way and you see the nature that leaps onto the wound, know that the wound is already healing, and health approaches.
And then unbind it in the morning of the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change the bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons have passed after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
For there are men in whom the flesh grows late in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
And if the undigested matter comes out of the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing.
And if the breast is slow to heal and is distant (from healing), then apply drying moist substances that are dry in virtue, such as refined ointment, for it contains a large part of copper, and this is the last medicine.
Take refined ointment, made with rose oil, and wash it with equal parts of old wine in substance;
then mix and apply it
and this same mixture works better when onions are not present, or take myrrh, aloe and incense, grind them up, powder them over the honey while it is over the fire;
and then use it as an ointment, apply it to the chest, sometimes you can add a long arrowroot and celestial lily roots, which are like vetch flour and centaury; and use them either as single ingredients or in mixtures: grind them up, make a powder, put it on the honey that I mentioned earlier, and apply it.
and if the treatment is prolonged and it is not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption has gone deep, and made an impression on the bone or hard members or ligaments; Si li cures de la fistule, si com nos avoms dit ci devant.
Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the finger or toe, or sometimes in other places.
and when it is neglected, and no care is taken of it, then this abscess comes about, and it runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it will destroy the entire nail.
and the corruption reaches the bone, causing a stinking pain, and the nail of the toe becomes wide, and its color turns red.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut off with an iron knife all the remaining excess of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
And if the nail presses into the flesh and begins to prick it and wound it, then you must place a thin strip of wood under the nail so that it no longer touches the flesh, and push it up, and carefully and lightly cut away that part of the flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove everything; then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it away and pull strongly, for as long as the corrupt bone remains there, it cannot heal;
and if you see that the finger is rotting, then cut it off at one of its joints as described above, then heal it until it is healed;
And if he is wounded and bruised and feels great pain, then you must heal him first.
then cut the nail of the sputum-making finger diagonally on top, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, then apply something soothing on top.
The two thumbs that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshly, and sometimes there is one with bones, and sometimes there is a nail, and sometimes they grow from the root of the joint, or their birthplace is in some of our fingers.
He who is born from any knot of the two does not move, and he who is born at the junction of the two, perhaps will move.
The cutting of the one who is fleshy is light in this way: cut him at his root with a broad sputum-making finger.
He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: If you hold [the shoulder].
In the case of one who is born or should at the anus, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh roundly down to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable saw, then heal it until it is healed.
The swelling that comes to the two together comes from birth, or from the joining of a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
It is necessary that you cut this seam, so that they may return according to their natural forms; then place between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not adhere. Or you can place between two thin plates of lead, until the site is healed, as needed.
If suddenly one of his fingers comes with the palm, cut that joint as needed.
Veins are large openings filled with melancholic superfluities, which come into many members of the body;
and it happens more in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry than in others.
Therefore, you should administer purging of bile to him, and then treat him with a plaster.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one is that they are cut, and the black blood is drawn out. And the other way is to lift the vein and draw it out completely.
The cut is made in this manner: first soak the patient's leg in very hot water until the thick blood becomes thin, then press on the patient's leg from above the hip to below the knee;
then cut the vein in one of these three places with a wide incision, and lift out and draw forth strongly the black blood into your hand from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength can bear;
and then tie it off, and instruct the patient to eat nourishing black food.
And the evacuation and bleeding restart when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The healing of it is according to this manner: shave the patient's leg, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and rinse the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it at the fire, and then cut towards the vein from the ankle to the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then remove the skin at the corner, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when touched;
And it is seen red and black, and when it enters the leather it seems also like a bleached rope.
Then push the thread down until it is raised from the leather, and then fold it at the corner lightly, then cut it in another place above three fingers.
Then scrape the leather on the vein until it appears, then raise it to the lace, as you have done, and fold it at another corner, as you did first.
Then cut another piece, or several if you need it, then lift it, and cut at the finger of the foot, then draw it and lift up to the second piece.
Then draw it from piece to piece until it comes out completely, then cut it off.
And if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a needle with all its strong thread doubled, tie and pull it, and insert under the skin, and turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out. And be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, then it cannot be pulled or lifted, and this will cause harm to the patient.
And when you have pulled it all out, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound. And care for it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it obliquely, but do not cut it. And there you draw as we have said before.
The form of the iron with which one cuts the vessel is curved and does not cut through, so that it does not cut the vein;
and is of a large curve, for if it were delicate, it would cut the vein. But let it be thick as we have said, and here is the form:
This vein is inserted in the legs, in hot places where no grass or tree grows, and in earth where there is no moisture.
And perhaps it can appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes beneath the skin, just as serpents and worms are inserted between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that it comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then the place changes, and the vein begins to emerge, just like the root of a plant.
When the wound opens, it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of cloth from one and a half to two and a half (inches or centimeters unclear), including the knot, and let the cloth hang down the leg. And every time some point escapes, you wrap it again around the cloth, and the knot;
And if it is too long, then cut off part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cut it at its root until all of it has come out. For if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad illness.
Therefore it is necessary that it be drawn out little by little until the end, and not leave anything in the body.
And sometimes this vein, when it is drawn from five palms in length, or from ten, and a man came to me, for whom it was twelve palms long, and when you cut it, then it throws out one or two drops of blood, and it pierces through to the bottom, so that all comes out;
and let the matter inside be emptied, and apply medicines that prevent corruption every day, then treat it as with abscesses.
And sometimes this vein has fewer drops of blood, especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there come many drops, from which it jumps drops;
then treat it as we have said before.
worms that grow between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "ox disease," because it happens often to oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes through the entire body ascending and descending, and one feels it well when moving from limb to limb, until it wears away the skin where it goes, and then leaps out.
It is infected by the putrefaction of certain humors, just like come worms and snakes and leeches and roundworms in the belly;
and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being healed and pulled out, one cannot do so except when it goes:
thus it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong tie very tightly, then cut above and pull strongly, and if the pus has entered deeply into the flesh, and you do not find it, then burn it with fire until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is that it infects the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming towards the head near the eye, restrain strongly under it with a scourge, then cut above, and pull strongly;
and the patient must use body cleansing with dissolving medicines for evil humors, and refrain from rotten foods.
Of the pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called in our land "vakirir," and it is a pain that comes in certain members, and then moves from member to member;
And I have seen what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
And soon after, I saw it move up to the shoulder like a worm, faster than anything, just as quick silver moves from one place to another;
The pain left that place and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a little while later it ran through her whole body until it reached the other arm;
Then she told me that it was always turning around her body, as I saw it.
I greatly wondered how it moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this illness in this way before. Nevertheless, I had seen many who wished to move pain from one place to another, but I had not seen it as I saw in the woman.
And I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body and exposed veins, and for this reason the forced winds appeared.
But it does not appear according to this reasoning in those who are delicate and have moist bodies and abundant veins.
And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then quickly cut above and below it, and then chop until that forced wind issues forth from the place. And cauterize the place.
And if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it as you would those who suffer from flatulence, such as stinking pills, and serapinus pills, and similar others.
Arrows vary according to their appearances and the places on the body where they strike.
The differences in them is that there are some which have large points, small ones, hooked and straight. And some that have two prongs, and those that have tongues, and those in which there are fragments.
And if it falls into any member, it falls according to two ways: Or in a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then into any part of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear to you: If it is necessary for you to beware of the extraction of this arrow, because death follows in many forms. And when this ill sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then draw it out, and treat the wound.
And the signs of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and there is a strong odor above the brain, are when the patient experiences loss of vision in one eye, dizziness, fainting, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps there is a strong odor from the nose or the ears. And perhaps he loses his speech and voice. And from the wound comes white moisture like a finger's tip, and it leaps out like charcoal's ember.
And if this sign appears to you, then avoid treating it, and remove the arrow if it is there.
The signs of an arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. And perhaps the arrow moves like a finger, and black blood flows from it, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting occurs. Know then without doubt that death follows.
And the sign of an arrow that never exits is when without plain foam it comes out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the kidney cover, it is near the small ribs; And casts great groaning and great pain and sighing; And moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested meat will come out of the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and some feces come out through the intestines, then there is no hope for a cure or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine spurts out and comes forth, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and neck, throat, shoulders, arms, spine of the back, chest, hips, legs, and similar members, are safe according to several conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man whose arrow fell into the forehead at the root of the nose: I tried it, and drew it out from another side under the skin of the ear, and he was cured without difficulty.
And drew from a youth an arrow that fell into the eye under the eyelid underneath, and the arrow was bent, and he could not grasp it except for the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, all of light iron without wings;
The youth was healthy, and no misfortune befell him.
And he drew an arrow from his throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic in origin:
I shaved the beard, and was subtle enough to draw it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I drew an arrow from a man, which had fallen into his belly, and I thought that he would die;
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change at all. I cut around the arrow, and hooked it, and drew it out strongly, and he had no misfortune.
And I saw a man upon whom an arrow had fallen on the back, and the wound was closed up; etti ne le pooit traire parmi, et n’ot point de mavais accident. etti je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.
And the arrow remained within him, and it did not change its natural dispositions at all, nor was there any harm in any of its natural works.
And he saw another man, upon whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was closed; and it remained thus without causing great pain;
and many other similar cases.
And he shot an arrow at one of the king's nobles, which had fallen into his nose and was slightly slanted towards the right side; and the arrow was completely bent.
I was called to tend to it after three days had passed since it fell. xspace Et mout d'autres semblans. I found the wound very narrow.
I examined it all with great care and did not feel any (pain or resistance); xspace et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor. And he felt a prickling pain beneath his right ear.
I thought it was from the arrow's tip; I placed on the spot an astringent and digestive plaster, so that the place would not swell. And the place of the arrow appeared to me.
And the place of the arrow appeared to me. I put the plaster on for fewer days, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose.
And he told me so. I placed a corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was open, and probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow which had lodged in place.
Then I inserted into the opening of the wound with that sharpened instrument, until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
and the deadline was exceeded by about four months, and then the wound opened where I inserted the pincers, and I pulled it from one side and another, but it could not come out.
then I did not stop trying and devising ways to use instruments until one day I took it with well-made pincers, according to the shape that will be shown at the end of this chapter, so that I pulled it out and closed the wound.
And physicians judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you direct your care towards what I do not say, for the book cannot encompass everything;
but the wise master comprehends well even a small thing, and that which is present and failing, finds nine works, and nine instruments, for the practice of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows should not be removed from the members into which they are thrust except according to two methods: or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
and that which comes out through the same place it entered is an arrow entering fleshy places, and this can sometimes be done now.
And if it does not jump now, leave it until the flesh is rotten around it, and the exit is lightened.
And also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it thus for some days, and soften it each day.
And then it will jump out, and if it does not, pierce around with all the delicate forceps until the place around is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is embedded in the body so that one cannot see it, then seek it out along its entire length; and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, then widen it until the wound is large.
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrow that hold it in place, then remove the flesh on both sides of the barb as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow so that you can draw it out.
And be careful not to break the arrow when you pull it out, so that you do not wound more severely.
And if you cannot do it in one go, leave it until the place around is rotten, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood troubles you, then use what we have said about treating it in its chapter;
And take care of the incision of the nerve and vein, and contrive how you can most safely pull out the arrow, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
And place the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help that can be done, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs indicate to you.
The arrow that comes out from another part, where it protrudes somewhat, or the skin is swollen in that place so that it is clearly visible or felt:
Cut then upward, so that the pincers can grab it, and then extract it. if it jumps now.
And if it is lodged in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone and widens the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it comes out.
and if there is the shaft of an arrow in it, push all of the shaft;
and if the shaft falls out and you see that a pushing instrument is needed, then administer an instrument with a groove in it so that the tip of the arrow enters into the groove of the instrument.
and then push strongly, and if the arrow is grooved, then push an instrument with an entering point into it to facilitate the extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
And if an arrow falls into the chest or the belly or the bladder or the side, and it is near, and you can strike above it, then strike.
And be careful not to strike the vein or the nerve, and then extract [the arrow], and then suture the wound, if necessary. And continue the care until it is healed.
The shape of the pincers used to extract arrows is like a bird's beak, and see here the form:
And there are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the tip for pushing [the arrowhead] is like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrow, as here is the form:
There are 31 ways to heal wounds, with 16 being in the head, namely: Two temples after the ears, which are called "herbish". et les deux artères qui sont dans les deux temples apparentes; And the two veins that are in the two corners of the two eyes, which are called "aspirants"; et la voine qui est au milieu du front; et la veine qui est au sommet du nez; and the two jugulars that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins that are commonly healed are five in each arm:
the first is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side, and common people call it "vein of the head"; And the way is called "fasting," and it is composed of cephalic and basilic, and common people call it "vein of the heart. And the basilic is in the right side, and common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the scapula, and it is that from which one bleeds, which clearly opens on the wrist.
And the salvatella is the vein between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
And in the leg and in the foot there are three veins: One is under the bend of the wrist on the left side, and the second is called saphena, which is at the ankle on the right side; And the vein called "nesse," which is in the ankle of the other side;
and there are three veins beneath them in the other leg.
The bleeding of the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
and the quality of the bleeder, as I tell you, is that you lift the patient's head and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then have the patient squeeze his neck with one hand, so that the two veins behind the ears appear in two places dependent on the head: pinch them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, prick it there;
Then take the lance, and pass it under the vein to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein, and cut well through the skin and the vein in two places, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish.
Then constrict it and bind, until it is healed.
And I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples serves for ancient migraine, and headache, and customary ophthalmia, and the body of acute tears in the eyes.
And the qualities of the bleeder are as I say. And it is that the patient should draw his neck, until the two veins appear clearly; and feel your thumb under your toe, then sign of the rest.
then lift the heart up onto the vein at the top of your toe, and push the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up, and cut it, as you have done with two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
then unbind the patient, and put your toe on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top; and then bandage it firmly, and leave it until it is healed.
And we have spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The bleeding from the forehead vein is worth as much as the bleeding from the cephalic for ancient face diseases, and for migraines, and for redness.
And its nature is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fosseur," which has this form:
And place the point on the vein, and strike with your hand or another object, and allow the blood to flow in the quantity that you desire; Then release the patient's neck and tie off the vein until it is healed, and sometimes use a wide flame to complete the task.
However, it should not be that the flame is too sharp; and cut at an angle, for the bone is nearby, and perhaps the flame will break when it is fine.
The bleeding of the two veins that are in two lids helps with the eyes, and with tinea, and with redness, and with the little corner of the eye, and with diseases of the face;
And the quality of their bleeding is such that the patient should twist his neck with some rope as before.
Then bleed, and let the bleeding be deep, a little long and a little wide, for there is no flesh there. And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it will break;
Then make the blood flow until you have enough, and then tie it off with cotton, and bind it well.
The bleeding of the vein of the nose is good for fever, and sudden madness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes on the face, and especially when it is chronic;
and the nature of the vein is such that the patient tightens his neck, then press your left hand against his nose, take a long, thin flame, and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it heals very quickly;
The vein of the two temples helps in the constriction of the head, and at the beginning of paralysis, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosions, and in shingles, and in inflammations;
And the quality of the wound is such that the patient should move his neck from one side to the other, as we have said.
And let the master stand on the patient's head, and the patient sit on a seat, then open the vein from the length of a span widely, then draw out the blood temperately, as much as is needed.
Then repeat with another vein, then untie the bandage, and press gently on all the veins, so that the patient does not strangle. And leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
Of the bleeding of the liver The bleeding of the wounds of the lips above helps to swell in the mouth, and to corrupt the gums, and to split the lips, and of the nose and around it.
And the quality of the bloodletting is to make the patient sit before you and draw out his neck as I have said. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is in the right lip and the other in the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins.
Then cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest one from each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
of the bloodletting under the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue follows the bleeding of the cephalic [vein], and this is for narrowing the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
and the nature of the physician is such that the patient lies in your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein.
heal one and not the other, and do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the knife with which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two methods:
either by pricking with the whole flame of a large myrtle or an olive tree, as sharp as cutting knives, and it is called "anesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the martin flame is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening the full veins filled with thick visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; et c’est la forme du fléau malaire:
And it is more subtle and pointed, and it is for healing subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The saphenous vein of the leg, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases under the throat, and in the neck, and in the foot, and in the stomach;
And it is necessary for the healer to cauterize wisely, and to beware of the artery that is beneath. And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow, then he must cauterize it, as I have said; And the flame should not be pointed, but rather shaped like a needle.
And if the leg vein does not open clearly, then you must squeeze it and change another [vein]. Where you wish to take some of his blood, or you heal the vein in its place within the arm: it opens clearly; and apply the flame cautiously, as we have said.
And if you wish to locate the vein, it is necessary first that you stretch out the arm so that you can touch the spot until you feel the pulse. then mark the spot with a knife and then tie off the arm and cauterize the vein with the flame carefully. and be careful not to cut into the artery when you see the spot swell, for it is from the artery. avoid it then.
And if you see it spurt upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is from an artery. Hasten then, and place your finger on it for a while, then remove your finger if the blood stops, which often happens. if his arm falls, let him remain still and not move it, the patient;
and hold it steady, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the blood does not clot and it overcomes you, and the physician is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, because the head of the vein will recede. and stop the blood.
And take a strip of linen, and tear it, and take one half and tie it firmly until the next day.
if the blood clots, that is good. ‌ If not, treat it as we have said with powders that staunch blood.
And the stanching is not difficult in many cases due to the small area of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The bleeding from the middle of the wound helps in that it draws blood from the top and bottom because it is composed of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein as we have said.
And the bleeder should be cautious because of the nerve that is underneath, and if it goes too deep and finds the nerve, and swells up, then stanching will be difficult, and possibly it cannot be staunched.
And this nerve often opens, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must stanch it with the cautery instrument. And let the nerve slip as best you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then make the incision lengthwise.
The sinus of the cephalic vein helps, for it draws blood from the head and aids in sight;
And it is necessary to incise in the pomegranate flame or in the myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, because under it there are neither nerve nor artery. However, one must seek the lightest place, and do not worry if one misses the first time, and start again; And sometimes the spot swells in some men when they miss the first time, but it does not matter.
The quality of the bleeding depends on your thought.
The first thing you should know about incising is that an incision is only done to preserve health and to avoid future diseases;
And let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are in the body: which are known as: cephalic, fastus, and basilica; And one should bleed at the beginning of spring to autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear;
And one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
The bleeding that is administered for illnesses has no set time, but should be done by day or night, at any hour and in all circumstances;
And it is not appropriate to bleed children under fourteen years of age, nor pregnant women until the seventh month. xspace Nor should the elderly over sixty years old be bled.
And when someone wishes to be healed in any way, it is necessary for them to cleanse the intestines with a light enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not attract the harmful superfluities from the intestines into the main members.
nor will someone be healed if they are too full of food, or drunk, as long as they remain so, or if they are suffering from dropsy.
and if one wishes to be healed after suffering from colic, vomiting, diarrhea, increased frequency of intercourse for women, and labor, vigil, fasting, or any other loss of strength due to a weapon or bodily illness.
Then refine the humors, if the blood is thick, by food and drink and medicine, if you have the power.
Then enter the bath, if nothing prevents you, to refine the blood, and heal the wound of the worst part by the third time, as we have said.
And guard yourself that day against work, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
And be happy and joyful, and let the healer's hand be higher than that of the person being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then pull on the ligament moderately, for if it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow.
And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and are felt;
then moisten the cauterizer with a little old oil, then place his left-hand thumb on that vein below the spot where he wants to cauterize, so that the vein does not burst or leak during the operation.
For there are veins that flow like cords to the cauterizer, and some are full of windiness, so that when one applies the flame, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is among them. And if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow; therefore, it is necessary for the cauterizer to be knowledgeable in these matters.
And if the vein opens on the first try, that is good; if not, then start again a little below or above that place, quickly, if the place is not inflamed.
And if the place is inflamed and the patient is frightened, let him wait for a day or two and do not tie up the arm. perhaps an abscess will form there
and do not enter into a bath, then start the bleeding again if he wishes to.
and if the opening is small or the blood flows gently and you doubt that enough blood will come out as you wish, then pierce that same opening with all the flame straight on.
and do the work quickly, before the place becomes inflamed; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place inflamed, do not restart the bleeding, and apply a poultice of linseed oil, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place lies the oil.
And so administer linseed oil to each bleeding you bleed the veins to stop the flow of blood;
and the same thing acts as a poultice and heals from them, when it is placed on the place. if it thins the blood and separates when it is too thick.
And if an abscess forms, which happens often, especially when it is not severely bled except for that time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place on the spot a sponge moistened in water and salt, a little hot, and hold it for an hour;
And it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein, and if some blackness or greenness remains in the place after several days, it will not harm him. And if you see, put on some aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mustard, or similar.
And often an abscess and swelling occur at the base of the vein:
Then place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft to the touch, then this swelling is bad. Avoid putting anything on it that we have mentioned, because by chance some of the blood may be coming from an artery.
But make a dry plaster to harden the area, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw from each one of the blood according to the quantity of its power and the color of the blood.
Because if the blood is black, let it out until it becomes red. And if you see it thick, let it out until it is refined. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And the one who is strong and healthy, if he needs to have blood let out, make him a larger wound, and the fire should be wide.
And for the weak one, do the opposite, and he should be bled frequently and often, and one must bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this method of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and it is worth more than the long or wide incision for bleeding.
Et à celui dont le corps manque de force, il faut donner du pain imbibé dans du jus de pommes. If he is hot, then draw blood three or four times; and if he is of a cold temperament, then before the bleeding, let him eat bread soaked in muscadine syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he bleeds from the wound after much blood loss, he must drink broth of meat and subtle scented syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wishes to bleed from the arm and bleed again later, it is necessary that when he has been weakened by much bleeding, he should bleed a little at a time, according to his strength, continuously.
And if someone wishes to bleed from the arm after the first bleeding and he has a strong body, then let him bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after nine hours.
And if someone wishes to bleed from another part of the body, he should bleed on the second day or the third.
Because there is much blood within the body which has already heated up, causing fever. therefore it is necessary to draw a large quantity of it, and widen the opening so that it can drain fully. Then, after you have considered all the conditions of bleeding and placed your hand on his pulse when he is bleeding, so that death does not come in place of blood, and this often happens when the bleeder is negligent.
And it is not necessary that when you see the arm dislocated, and blood comes out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press very hard; nor if it is bent, to extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad;
but let it remain until it heals a second time; or you point it with the tip of the flame, so that the blood which is frozen at the opening of the vein flows out, and place a poultice made in water on top, and press gently.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess is healed.
And if there is a need to bleed a second time, then heal it in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins in the arms are healed in the vein of the head because they are closer.
And the manner of healing is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the fingers turn red;
then it should be tied moderately, so that the veins appear well, then heal across now, not widely nor lengthwise;
And let the opening be wide, and let it be cauterized well near the joint of the hand, and if pus cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough;
And if it is in summer, then do not put the hand in hot water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
And the cautery of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no major artery or nerve in it.
The cautery of the little finger of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done:
Hold the hand tightly and put it in hot water until the vein swells, if you see it. And if you slash it across, and if you cut it all around, then it will not hurt.
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are bare under all the flesh, and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
And when you have drawn as much blood as needed, then put oil and seal on the vein to heal quickly, and do this for each time.
The bleeding from his left hand is as valuable as the disease of the mouse, and does everything just as I have told you concerning the right.
The bleeding from the spleen is as valuable for all diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the thighs and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of its bleeding is such that the patient should put his foot in hot water, and rub on the wound until it breaks, and bind over the ankle. And the wound is at the ankle, and above the foot go many rains;
cut it then in the widest part of the vein, or at the ankle, which is better.
And if you treat it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are underneath, and cut through them as in slicing.
And let the flame be gentle.
And if the blood cannot flow out, then put the foot back in water, and let the wound drain well.
And if the cutter fails the first time, then begin again a little higher, for the place is salted;
Nor doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the ankle of the other foot likewise.
The place of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its bleeding is good for hip pain, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of this cutting is such that the patient enters into a bath, and pulls four fingers above the ankle by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
And if it opens, then cut in all the ways that you can, and by slicing through; And it is better that you cut it, for the place is safe, and she is very responsive in many men.
And it is better that you cut it, for the place is safe, and she is very responsive in many men. And if you cannot find it, then cut some of its skin that is open on the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and make the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then unbind the bandage, and apply cotton and bind it on; she is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or iron, or glass;
and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this cupping which is done without pricking is in two ways: where it is all fire, or without fire;
and venesection which is done by bleeding and bloodletting, is performed in fourteen places on the body, one of which is entirely at the top of the head; and another is in the neck; and two others on each side of the neck; and a cupping glass under the chin; and a cupping glass on both shoulders; and a cupping glass on the hips; and cupping glasses on both arms; and cupping glasses on both legs; and cupping glasses on both ankles; etime
and venesection does not draw blood, except from the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken at all, as one would do with a venesection of a vein; And it is not necessary that she be administered, neither by any fire nor without fire, in any disease caused by excess, until the entire body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to ventose, or for custom, administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, in the middle, and at any time.
For there are some who, when they need to be ventosed, have a heavy head;
And there are those who find swelling and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness of vision.
And there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and vomit blood. and there are some who dream of seeing blood and wounded and dead things.
And when we see these signs, especially in the middle of the month, we order them to be bled after three hours of the day.
The draining of the nose also helps with the headache ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this draining is in place of the draining of the head, and it should not be used by those who are of cold complexion or have catarrh, because it does great harm to them.
and for this reason, the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
And he who often bleeds from it becomes forgetful, and because of this one should place the cupping glass a little lower out of fear of forgetfulness.
The draining in the neck is in place of the draining of the head and the nose, and for this reason it is useful for constriction of the bladder, and for cleaving the passage of the spleen, and for constipation, and for fullness.
And there it is necessary to apply little by little, for if it holds too firmly, then it injures the stomach and the heart.
The ventosations at the second rib of the neck are good for headaches, and migraines, and for strangulation, and for toothache, and it is in the place of the basilica's sinus.
And it is necessary that you instruct the patient to press his hand firmly, so that he does not cut the artery and does not cause a flow of blood.
The ventosations under the chin are good for mouth diseases, and for rotting of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; And it is in the place of the sinuses of the two lips.
The ventosations of the shoulders are effective against diseases caused by heat and inflammation.
The cauterizations of the ribs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins.
And instruct the surgeon not to strike too deeply, for the place is bare of flesh, and beneath are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is on the buttock is worth as much for hemorrhoids and diseases below, and it should be large, and made of copper, so that it can draw well. And perhaps, if it were too delicate, it would break. And it makes large wounds.
The cupping glasses on the legs are effective, for they draw blood from the whole body, and they are worth as much against old pains of the kidneys, and the spleen, and the bladder, and they remove phlegm.
And they are in the place of two spleens and two ankles, yet they weaken the body after long use, and cause paralysis in many conditions.
The manner of placing the cupping glass is to place it first empty, and suck immediately, and place quickly, and move equally, and do not stop doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and apparent is the redness of the blood;
then burn, and replace the cupping glasses, and pay attention to the constitution of the body, for there are some who have dark flesh, and clear pores: then it is necessary to burn only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and one deep puncture; and suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, one must strike twice: the first time to make a subtle incision for the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, one must strike a third time;
and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, we only need to do it once. And if we want a lot of blood, we must repeat often;
and if the blood is thick, strike deeply, and the outcome is that the heart should be pierced suddenly. And for those who have thick and hard skin, and whose pores are narrow, it is necessary to anoint the places of the cupping glasses with aperitive and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil;
and if it is in winter, with cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
And if the excess is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsam oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
And if one treats a person with thin skin and large pores, there should be no oil applied to it, but it must be washed after being fumigated with rose water, or cold water, or mallow water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or another similar liquid.
And one who has much moisture should use aloes, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have excessive waste should rise with old wine, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar ones;
and it is not appropriate to cup before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two.
and he should not sleep after cupping, and he must be clean when he is to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
And watch out if he who is healing is irascible, and if his blood is too acrid and inflamed. then he should take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce in vinegar, and similar things. and minced partridge, and roasted meat, and moist food.
and minced partridge, and roasted meat, and moist food. And he who has a cold constitution should take syrup of honey, and medium-aged aromatic wine, which is between old and new, and minced pullet, and minced partridge and small birds and thrushes.
and on the day he purges himself, he should drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give some men sometimes theriac or mastic before purging, or after, to strengthen the main members. And let the blood be thinned, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The blisters that are placed without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the bladder, and for gout, and on the belly and the groin and the hip, because these members cannot be cut on the eyes, and it is only done to draw blood from one member to another, just as we place them on the breasts when the child nurses;
to remove the swelling that is in the member, just as we place blisters on the belly and groin to reduce the member;
and removes the pain, when there is an ulcer or stone, and by its attractive power it draws out the ulcer, or moves the stone from its place.
And so it does when placed on the liver and on the bladder when there is retained flatulence, and these cupping glasses are administered empty for sucking only. And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and other times filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that the cupping glass is filled solely with hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have on its side around the middle a small hole, just large enough to insert a needle, and let it be of brass or soft metal so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb.
And have in the middle a rod of copper or iron crosswise, to place a cloth bandage, and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who use them.
for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
And thus must one place this cupping glass upon the member:
take the cloth of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping glass across the rod that is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass that it may not burn the patient;
and then place it upon the member, and your two fingers should be upon the opening that we have mentioned, so that when one wishes, out go the vapors, and remove the cupping glass.
And one applies the binding again as before, and often restarts it if necessary.
In the cupping used for pleurisy, there is no rod or hole in it, and it is only applied when full of water, and is placed on the member alone;
and this is its form:
Leeches are only applied in members where one cannot place cupping due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in bare flesh places, such as the nostrils or the nose, and other similar places;
and the quality of the user is that when you find leeches that are in clean, soft waters without impurities, then take them;
And he places them in a pot of soft water, until they are familiar with it, and have nothing in their stomachs. And then let them be bled from a vein and by cupping, then rub the limb until it turns red, and apply leeches.
And when they are full and drop off, if it is a place where a cupping glass can be applied, then apply it, for this is very valuable afterwards.
If not, then raise the area with egg whites, and then with water, very well, and then compress it;
And if the area bleeds too much after the leeches, then moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it on top until the bleeding stops.
And if the blood is plentiful, apply powdered vitriol, or gallnuts, and similar things, until it is stanched.
or place on the wound half of peeled broad beans, and leave them until they dry up in place, it will now staunch.
And if you need more, take other leeches.
And if the leeches do not want to take [blood], then rub the wound with fresh blood, or insert a needle until blood comes out, and then apply them, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry up.
And when you see that they fall off, then sprinkle on a little powder of aloe and boiled linen, or ash, and they will now fall off.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the setting of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that foolish physicians reject this chapter, for they have never seen any ancient books or letters concerning it.
and for this reason the knowledge has become strange in our land, for I have never found any good one here.
and I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have acquired the knowledge from them, and by experience, and by the practice of my life.
and I have now described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I have done in these two preceding chapters.
It is necessary therefore that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a break or dislocation or twist or fracture comes to someone, you must hurry to heal the patient on one side and then the other, unless something prevents it entirely, such as physical weakness, or infancy, or old age. Or if the season is too hot or too cold.
And chew on cold foods, that is, cold jellies, and birds and game, and drink no wine, nor chew any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are certain of no hot abscess or spread of matter in the limb.
If the patient returns to his usual diet first.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that promote thickening, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and heads (of animals), and feet, and cow's pancreas, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For such nourishment, the bone splinters and fractures heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres,
but do not care, set on the broken bone a strong pin that holds and joins the member together, so that it strengthens as before; and do not completely take it from its work, and therefore one must feed it with rich foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are various in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes across (transverse), and another in oblique direction, like the cut of a quill for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes across (transverse), and another in oblique direction, like the cut of a quill for writing. And there is a fracture with wound, and a fracture with just a small crack.
And for each type there should be its own device and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what comes back into place.
and it is known that the bone break occurs because the place is twisted, and opens well from the outside, and sounds when pressed with the hand;
And when there is no dislocation or swelling, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
But it can still have dislocation, a split, or a small fracture. If you do not need to move it with your hand, but rather apply the medicines that follow, and then gently hold it now.
And know that the breaks that go in an arc, and are the two parts dislocated, you must now set them equally, before abscesses form there.
And if abscesses develop there, leave it for some days until the abscesses subside;
Then set it equally with as little and wise effort as you can, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration of one where there are fragments.
then grasp it, as is required hereafter.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, then stretch it from two parts, whether it be the hand or foot, or at your hand if it is a small member, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset all the additions in their places as best you can, and be careful not to cause injury or pain to the patient through your work.
and adjust the two ends of the bones according to the best shapes.
And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well:
If you straighten it beautifully, and do not press too much, nor squeeze like those who cause a hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is set, instruct the patient well not to move it, neither in wakefulness nor in sleep, nor in turning, nor in any other way; and take good care that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not set properly, and one must put him in such a position that he feels no pain;
and take good care that the limb is so secure that he does not feel any pain. For when he feels no pain, it is not set properly, and one must put him in such a position that he feels no pain; and take care that he is placed straightly, so that there will be no twist when he is restored.
And the quality of the broken limb is as I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness, largeness, and shape.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar ones: it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths; and those which are large, such as the thigh and leg:
it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandage embraces all of the large limb, and holds it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap.
then place around it light stuffing, three or four turns depending on the limb, and tighten your hand a little to all the bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break is moved away slightly.
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a great part of the healthy place, then take the other ligament and turn it again around the broken place.
then return to the part below the break and hold it moderately, not too hard nor too soft, as we have said in the first place above.
then place between the ligaments linen or cloth strips, so that they are all even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, place on top something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it thus for some days.
then restrain on your shoulders, and let them be of half the width of a strong rope, or of wood from which they make wedges, or of palm fibers, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the shoulder support placed on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and let it also be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large. then restrain on the supports in the same way as you did at the first time, then bind over it with a bandage, just as at the first time on the fracture. tighter is above, always less so below;
and it is necessary that the bandages be of medium size, not too thick nor too thin, and they should be soft linen.
Because if the threads are thick, just as I have seen the work of fools who make their ligatures from twisted flax cords, and this is a great error, because the ligature cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' width between each knot.
And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the stars after the contraction in their healthy places, then place under them linen wicks or shredded wool, so that it does not wound.
When the wound is with the fracture, and the heart is broken, I will speak of its treatment later.
And know that it is not necessary to set all the fractured limbs on the first day. Because when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put in ligatures stronger than after five or seven days, or more according to your surety of heat occurring from an abscess;
and see here the method of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and twisting:
And it is that you take the flour that stays against the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and put this preparation, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fractures in many situations, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Other manner of plaster for restoring breakage, dislocation, and twisting: Take abreis, ladanum, henbane, asafetida, Arabic gum, and mugwort, amounting to twelve denarii; myrrh and aloe, amounting to five denarii; garlic, nine denarii; and make it into powder, and mix it with the white of an egg. If the man's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and it is beneficial to many men.
Another manner of plaster for twisting: Take mugwort and marshmallow, amounting to ten denarii; Mirror and aloe, seven nine. Alum, six. Bole armoricain ten, and grind well, and infuse with plenty of egg water, and administer it.
Another way to make a plaster for displaced joints and dislocated bones, which relieves the resulting pain and uses the bone shards: Take new wool, and soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the spot.
This poultice does not restore [the joint or bone], but it is good for soothing a hot abscess and properly relieves pain.
Another way to make a plaster that mends broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and common dandelion leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another way of making a poultice for the restoration of bone fractures and to draw out the remaining pus from an abscess. Take root of marsh mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, chickpea flour, one part each;
and grind, and cook with wine, and if the limb is heated, cook with moist coriander water or with water, and use it.
Another method of poultice stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of marsh mallow, and flax seed, mallow, melilot, and comfrey, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; and grind, and cook with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras says in his book that nothing should be put on a broken limb to restore its strength except for a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and it should be between two [things], not too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that dry and slightly warm things should be put on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another plaster recipe that is good for injury and pain: Take mullein and chopped onions, or bird feathers, and marshmallow, and celery equally, and crush them, and make a poultice with it and bind it.
Then unbind it after a while, and see if the patient feels any pain, or if the bone has moved from its place; then do not unbind for many days. And if pain comes to the place, or itching without rest or swelling, then hurry and unbind it, and remove the poultice immediately;
and take a light cloth, and a wet sponge of sea water, and dip it in water, and lift the place until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed; Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a knot, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
and the inflammation of the limb will subside, and the pain will be gone, then begin with a subtle binding, and a little plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before. and continue with this until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, I have removed everything from it, and you need plaster and linen, then start again, just as you did first.
And if nothing happens to the limb as we have said, do not unbind it until after three days or four or five or seven. and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the break heals, and the skin approaches.
Then restrain him more than before, and it increases his flesh.
And if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come there. Therefore, apply hot water dressing each time you loosen him, every three days, and slightly loosen the bandage.
Through this work, nourishment is brought to the limb and quickly improves what foolish physicians do, who wrongly return the twisted limb.
This is bad, and it is a dangerous practice, and I see nothing else to do but to let it alone and work on it correctly.
Many kinds of fractures are there, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct.
for there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the neck removes all the bone up to the marrow which is beneath the bone, like an axe or a stake; and for this reason this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
When the sword strikes the bone from above without penetrating it, this manner of fracture is called "absolue";
and the wound from these two fractures can be large or small.
And if there is a blunt force trauma, or a splinter or a kick from a stone, or from falling onto stone, or other similar things.
And if there is a deep cut that reaches the tissue beneath the bone or on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
And there is a wound that is filled in the bone as thin as a hair, and the fracture is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
and there is the wound that is made by striking with a stone or falling or something similar, which causes a piece of bone to enter lower, and the place is indented like when blacksmiths strike on the anvils; if between the stones within
And this happens more often to those who have moist bones in their head, such as children's heads;
and it occurs with all these types of fracture where small fragments are separated like stars. and I will speak about this in its place.
Et reconnaître toutes les manières de fractures par la traction sur elles, et l'interrogatoire avec des sondes, et par la chair corrompue qui est dessus.
The similarity to hair is known by this: when the bone is exposed and rubbed upon, black fracture appears.
In the care of the fracture, beware of the patient's accidents, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of senses, stretching, paleness, fever, and others in many dispositions, then he cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a frightening accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded person comes to you first, and this is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the new moon that you can.
And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the flesh under the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, you must split the split part as follows:
and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as possible. And if blood flows when uncovering the bone or an abscess like this, let him be helped with what is necessary. And it is that you fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil; And let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be assured of no further bleeding; Then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of working:
one way is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
And then he puts in another cut larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have various cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of steel;
And work lightly, so as not to injure the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must bore through it before you administer cuts with trepans, not so deep that they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; xspace
and you must have several of them, so that each comes in its place on the bone's width, so that you have splints for all tests.
and it is in the form of three kinds of splints:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one splint on the bone and turn it with your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced.
then place the splint elsewhere a little while after, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone in your hand or any of the instruments you have such as pincers.
And make sure you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, it is necessary that you then use the instrument that remains attached to the bone for all other similar instruments resembling a chisel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other chisels;
And if there remains anything of the small bones or any scales, then gently remove them with an instrument. Then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of work is that which Galen says is safer; and he praises it greatly, and these are his words. It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone, where the fracture is open, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place under the head of this lancet-like instrument, which has this form:
And do not cut on one side, and the part is bent in two sides, so that the cutting tool is towards the bone;
then strike with a small hammer on top, so that you lightly tap around the entire bone, and be careful of the cloth underneath;
if it is rough against the bone, then lightly smooth it out, for one can remove it well without harm and without fear.
Et si la fracture de l'os ne perce pas jusqu'à la peau, et que l'os est coupé seulement par le dessus, avec des petits morceaux, alors il faut gratter cette aspérité et retirer les écailles à l'aide d'un rasoir subtil, dont tu dois avoir différentes quantités pour administrer dans chaque endroit ce qui est le plus approprié, selon la nature du travail et la forme de la fracture.
Et si l'os présente des fissures profondes, utilise d'abord un grand rasoir, puis un rasoir plus fin, et continue ainsi jusqu'à ce qu'il soit bien poli.
In each of the other subtle cuts and breaks, you must bring the cause according to its direction;
and this is something that has not been answered by one who has studied this art.
And if the wound is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another doublet, folded in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first doublet; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the surface, then place another ligature on top, and do not tighten it any stronger than necessary to touch the wound only;
and leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess is appeased, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, and similar things.
and of these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer medicines modestly without harshness.
And see to it that the wound is always clean, that you do not leave any ointment in it, and do not let pus gather, because when pus gathers on the caul of the brain, it will run and putrefy, and great evil befalls the patient.
for when one applies to the wound a biting thing, it necrotizes on top. Take care therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful.
And if blackness comes to it except for the medicine that one has applied, which has such power, then you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and make a plaster with them, and apply it to the wound. then continue the care in various ways as needed until it is healed.
You should know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, either one alone or both together, for these are two bones.
And that below is made of gristle and does not break, but only causes a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or a probe into the nose, and equalize that fracture within your middle finger, and hold it in place by force until the nose returns to its natural shape. Do this gently, and be careful not to cause the patient pain through your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then you must place it evenly at the end of a thick reed.
And if the fracture is of both parts, then do the same, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, after the seventh or tenth day, when this abscess is healed, then apply to the head of the nose bandages of linen cloths, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you place another [bandage] on the other side, if the fracture is there. And let the bandages be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
And some say that one must grease the threads in butter and change them daily. It does not seem to me that this is good, but they must be moistened in the making of a mixture of egg and flour. Then leave the bandage until the bones are healed and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes one places goose feathers in the nose instead of bandages, and then wraps a soft cloth around it, and if the fracture holds, and the patient breathes through it. And do as you wish.
And if such an abscess comes to the nose while you work there, place a poultice of cotton soaked in rose oil or a little bit of aquiline.
And if such abscesses do not form, then apply an external plaster made of sesame flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place light dressings on top, and do not bind the neck.
And if the neck fracture is small and broken into many pieces, then reset it with suitable instruments, then sew up the gap, and treat similar flesh wounds, and let them heal, such as suitable plasters and bandages for this.
And if there is no wound inside the neck, then treat it with tents, and place lead weights in it until it heals.
When the jawbone is dislocated beneath, and there is no wound outside of it, and the fracture is only outside, and it is not broken in two, except for being indented inside, then one recognizes it easily.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inside, and fix it with the other hand from outside, and align it.
And if the jawbone fracture is divided into two, then you must administer traction on both parts until they are even.
And if there is movement or dislocation of the teeth, then fasten them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place wax on the broken jaw, and put on a double cloth. and place on the cloth a large, well-made splint, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above the teeth as tightly as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat only light foods.
And if you see that the appearance changes, then dislocate it on the third day, and then reset at the place where it changed. And apply a plaster on top, of powder from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the wax;
And put on a light cloth over the plaster, and if the plaster dries out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is cured. often he is cured in three weeks.
And if an abscess like this occurs, bring it about as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, inspect whether any piece of bone has been removed; then remove it with the appropriate instruments for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, close the wound if it is wide, and place on it suitable plasters to promote healing until it is healed.
The ligament breaks several times in front of, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three types:
where it is broken and separated into two parts, and there are fragments, and this is the easiest to restore.
or there is fracture with wound.
And the work of this is when the fracture is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the ligament is broken. and the other extends the neck towards the side.
then place the fracture evenly between your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no deviation or swelling. xspace
And if you need to extend more, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity. xspace And stretch and raise the bandage, and press the sphere to your hand, so that you set the break evenly as needed.
And if you cannot pull the head of the bone out due to its depth, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back, and place under the shoulder a pillow of medium size, and the assistant presses the shoulder down until the bones of the broken limb are raised.
And then adjust the break with your fingers, and if you find it splintered, it is necessary to split open.
And draw out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut it with one of the incisors that you have. But place this instrument under the bandage to protect the flesh.
And it looks like a spoon, and is not curved, and should be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and the power of the work. ething look
And it should have two points, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound you made when you drew out the bone.
And when you are certain of a hot abscess, stitch the wound, and if the rupture is small or you doubt a hot abscess, fill the wound with cloths and bandages, according to its size.
And if such abscesses occur, soak the cloth in rose oil and basil and wine, and apply it.
The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds or cuts, is to place on the bone a plaster made from mill powder and egg white, then put light wadding on top, and place a splint underneath if needed. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put a double cloth on top of the wadding and the plaster. Then take a thin strip of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around the bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down. And place the star above the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy shoulder, and beneath the sick shoulder. And reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the break well, and you see clearly that the star does not move above the broken bone, then bandage it every day, and when the ligature loosens, then bind it again.
And make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the healthy shoulder while they sleep, to raise the sick shoulder. Thus the fracture will be relieved of its heaviness by the elevation of the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless an accident occurs, for up to twenty days.
Then renew the poultice, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it and leave it thus, until it is healed;
And it is healed in as many as 28 days, or less in some men.
of the break of the shoulder
It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks in a large place or in the middle, and it is not known except by touching;
If you prepare it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can;
Then put on the place powder of mill with plenty of egg, and light stuffing, and put on a double cloth;  () Then put on a wide and fine bandage, somewhat wider than the shoulder, and if there is an indentation in any part of the shoulder under the bandage, fill that hollow with flax stuffing so that the bandage lies evenly;
And then he binds it firmly with a large bandage so that the joint does not move from its place, and checks the ligature every day.
And every time it loosens, he binds it again and sets the joint straight if it is out of place, and the patient lies on his side.
And the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
And when this number is completed, he unbinds it, and be assured, for it is not an easy thing to displace the bone.
And if a fragment of the bone protrudes forward and pierces beneath the heart, it rises up and removes the bone, and does as we have said in the breaking of the rib to heal an abscess, hot.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; But it often breaks at the toe.
And when it is broken in half, it inclines downward and the patient feels great pain, and fainting, and dizziness, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the wound in the broken bone, which can be felt well.
And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on his back, and he places a pillow between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and joins the ribs from the second rib with both hands, and does his best to straighten it in all ways possible until the bone's shape is as it should be; abei
then place plasters and wool over the thin layer of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and secure it over the broken bone, so that it does not move. and turn the bandage around the back, and fasten it firmly, and check every hour the binding, and if it becomes loose, then tighten it.
and if it is necessary to loosen it, due to inflammation or itching that occurs in the area, or pain or abscess, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and apply whatever has come of the various treatments.
then replace the plaster, and fasten it until it is healed.
Of rib fractures
Saiches that the breaking of ribs occurs only in large bones behind the back, and inside the head, and they break only because they are slippery. And the patient feels it well during questioning, just as they should.
And the treatment is that you set the fracture evenly, as is necessary. Then apply a plaster and bind it with a bandage, if needed.
And if the breaking of the ribs is slanting inwards, then the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, as if from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the flesh. And breathes with difficulty and coughs up great plants of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients had great ingenuity in it.
And so there are those who say that he should be given food that bloats the stomach to push out the break.
We do not do this, for hot abscesses may come if they are not already present. And if they have come, then heal them.
And some say that one should place cupping glasses on the spot to draw out greatly, and this seems reasonable; If fear arises that the cupping might draw the excesses to the place due to weakness.
And some say that the site should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil, and tents should be placed between the ribs to make the lung even all around, then let it be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because of the bone that pierces the flesh, and there is fear in the patient, then one must cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to protect the hypochondrium.
Then one should cut the bone and gently pull it out, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if these abscesses come, then place wet cloths in rose oil on the spot;
And treat it as you would an abscess, and let it lie on its back on the side where it should be, until it heals.
And so too with the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take note whether you see his hands becoming soft and swollen and numb, and he cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Know that he is mortal in many cases, and if he moves them and feels well when they are pulled and pricked, know that the bone's joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if he is treated.
And if something similar happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it is healed or not, take care whether the feet are weakened, and if there are accidents that are in the hands, and on the back is a swelling and evacuation without control;
And when it has been placed on its belly, there is an evacuation without control. And when it is healed on its back and it wants to rise, it cannot. Know that it is fatal: If he does not work hard at his treatment.
And if this does not happen to him, then the condition is less serious.
And the treatment is such that if there is a hot abscess, you should place hot rose oil or egg yolk oil on it until it is soothed.
Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if any bone is dislocated, you must cover it with the curette. And remove the bone, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat it with incisional healing ointment until healed.
And if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow," insert your thumb from your left hand and align it with the other hand to your power, then place the poultice and bandage on top, if you need to.
Then hold it firmly in place, and if there are any bone fragments, bring them out, remove them, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the hip bone
It happens sometimes that the hip bone is broken, and if it does, it has no more strength than a little weakening at the top; And the leg becomes long, and leans to one side, and the patient feels pain in that place, and sharpness, and swells like it is broken.
And the reduction is such that you extend your hand upwards until you are above the break. and know what the fracture and its shape are;
and if the fracture is only at the end, set it straight until it is in its natural shape.
And if the break is lengthwise, or tilts inward, then have the patient lie on their stomach, until you are prepared to restore this break. And when you have set it straight, apply a poultice, then place a splint of wood or bone on top, and secure the fracture so that it does not move.
and bind the area below the ribs until the limb is straight. Command the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
And if an abscess forms there, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and then apply what we have said before. And then return to the resetting, and hold it as needed if there is no bad incident.
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder is what is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be reset according to one of the two methods.
one method is that you take a stick full of medium thickness, like this shape:
And tie it to the two heads with two ties, and pull upwards, and have the patient sit on a chair.
then have the patient throw his broken arm onto the stick until it reaches the armpit, and have in the middle of the stick an arch of wood, then pull up with some heavy object or the assistant extends downward.
Then let the physician place the splint equal to his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
And the other method is that one places the patient on his back, and ties the hand to his neck; then commands two assistants: one to hold what is above the fracture in his hands, and the other to hold below all the joint, and each stretches at his part.
And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then tighten each ligament below the break and above the break, and extend each of the members to its side.
And if the splint is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you place one strap in the middle under the arm, and another towards the elbow, under the splint;
and also if the splint is towards the elbow, it is necessary to place a strap lightly, without effort, so that the splint is equal on the place, and on the elbow;
then make the splint even, as it should be, and bind it, if there are no abscesses there.
And if abscesses come there, do not bind until the seventh day, and place moist linen on it in ease and rose oil, so that these abscesses may be appeased;
then it is restrained, and the manner of restraining it is that you place the compress on the break, then bring the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
and place the bandage, and restrain on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in the position of a star, if nothing hinders it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use of stars is required. Place on the break a star wider and stronger than the others, and there should be two fingers' width between each star, and each star should be so large that it passes beyond the break by three fingers on each side;
Then pull up on the shoulders as I said at the beginning of the chapter on breaking bones, more strongly and less in stretching.
And if you see the setting of the shoulders and the pulling as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, then leave it to be bound for seven days, as we have said;
Then check every three days the bandage, that no itching or swelling comes to the place, where the care cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. If you receive it, as we have said.
And if no such incident happens, then do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach;
And place under the shoulder a pillow filled with wool equally, and observe every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken member does not move, or be softened the ligament;
if he receives it by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have previously described, in such a way that the food is first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken for forty days in total; and then one must free him and administer a bath and remedies of ointments to heal the place.
And if the constriction is ugly and clogged, it will take days or two months to loosen.
of the arm's fracture
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two scapulae", one of which is small and follows the shoulder blade;
And the other is large, and it is the one below, towards the little finger;
perhaps the large phalanx breaks alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small phalanx is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more serious than when both are broken together.
If it is the small bone that is broken alone, then you should extend it slightly and set it straight.
And if it is the large phalanx, then it must be held more tightly;
and extend it on a cushion, and hold the patient's hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no discomfort; ︎
Then let the minister extend his arm to the lower part under his hand, or at one ligament, and another minister to the other above.
Then let the physician set it straight, according to its best form.
And if the fracture is in pieces, then put each one in its place; and if there is any that sticks out which you cannot restore to its place, then cut it off and remove it, as we have said before.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, I have spoken about it in a separate chapter. If he takes the care.
And if in the beginning of the treatment there are such abscesses, then attach a piece of plaster made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft. And delicately place the cloth on top, until these abscesses are soothed.
And then remove the plaster, and apply a poultice of flour from the mill with plenty of egg, then apply the bandages, and let the bandage of the fracture be always stronger, and a little wider than the others.
And know that there must be six stars on the arm in various positions: whether the break is in one of the bones, or in two.
and apply more pressure on the break than elsewhere, and always less while stretching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. and let the bandages that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough.
and let the bandages that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough. and let the thread, with which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And return the limb and the ligament after some days. And if some evil accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must wash the limb with hot water until that itch is appeased.
And let the limb not rest too tightly.
And then begin the splinting again, and if the ligament is softened and the bone dislocated, or similar things, set it.
And if you take care that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too narrow, then you should soften it in a poultice and leave it like this for some days until the nourishment reaches there, and then splint it.
Et si aucune de ces choses que nous avons dites ne vient au malade, alors ne le délier pas avant vingt jours.
or, in which case, let him place his hands on his neck, and his shoulders should be even, and he should guard against movement and shifting, and sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or thirty-five, and sometimes in twenty days, according to the composition and complexion of the humors.
De la fracture de la main
Sachez que dans le dos de la main et aux jointures des doigts il arrive peu de fractures, et qu'il ne s'y produit que des entorses à plusieurs reprises.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sits cross-legged, and sits upright in front of him equally;
then let him place his hand on the stretched cloth, and let the attendant straighten the broken bones, and let the physician set them evenly until they are well joined;
And place the plaster and bandages, if no abscess occurs, then place a needle according to the size of the place. And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is on the side around the waist of the leg, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to tie it to his broken leg. And then bind it with a long cloth, and let the needle be as soft as a human hair, and as large as the palm of the hand, and tie it as needed.
And if the fracture is at the tip, it is necessary that you place a splint on top and another below at the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie all around the hand, and secure the bandage between the two fingers.
And if the break is in any of our fingers, if it is protruding, set it straight as needed. And hold it with the sole, and if you see thus place a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move.
And if the fracture is in one of the other fingers, such as the index or any other, set it straight, and tie it with the sound finger that follows. Or you bind them all together in one bandage, as needed, or you place a splint on top, like a pouch.
And take care in the restoration and placement of a hot abscess, and support whoever comes to help, as I have said.
The thigh bone is often broken, and it is well seen when it twists forward and backward;
And the restoration is such that one ligament is tied above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends his line equally to his part.
and this is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the ties should be towards the knee, and the other tie below the break.
And so if it is near the knee, then let the line be below the knee, and the extension downwards.
then let the surgeon put the bone equal with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then put the dressing, and bind it, if no abscess comes there.
And if there is a hot abscess, leave it to settle, then return to your work and care. the bandage is made in this manner.
You must wrap over the fracture one bandage double-layered in two or three places, leaving excess material. Then turn the leg until the heel comes to the base of the nail, and thread a long string between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, making the ends meet above.
then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the break splints, and place a splint on the bone of the leg;
then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make the splint even, then begin to tie tightly three or four times on the break; and when you go higher up the break, tie it less tightly.
then attach at two ends of the thread that you have passed between the leg and the thigh, and tie three splints that are on top, then go back down to the end of the thread, until you reach near the foot.
and secure it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, for if there is no abscess or swelling or anything similar. And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address whatever comes of it, as we have said many times.
And if there are bone fragments that prick, they must be removed, if possible; And if it is not possible, then the place should be split open and pulled out strongly. And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thigh bone breaks like splinters, as in the shoulder and arm;
nonetheless, in such a restoration the patient does not limp.
And know that the thigh is restored in 40 days, or a little less or more, depending on the diversity of complexions.
Know that in the tendon of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is only a fissure or a hole, and this happens in every wound, both in open and closed wounds, and everyone feels it well.
And the restoration is such that one should place equal what is broken on each side, so that it is assembled as well as possible.
Then apply the poultice, and if you need it, place a round spindle in it, and bind it as required. Then follow all the instructions we have mentioned for other fractures, such as abscesses or similar ones; If he applies to each injury what is necessary until he is healed.
Of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is rightly called "tibia," and the other is called "fibula.
And all other fractures happen as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of the arm, and the workings are the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg twists in every direction.
And if the smaller bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et s'il y a une fracture d'un grand os, on ressent une grande douleur, et cela est visible. et cela se retourne en dessous.
Alors, appliquez une traction pour l'aligner, et fixez les éclisses de manière égale;
Cependant, si la fracture est complexe avec plusieurs fragments, il faut appliquer une traction plus douce et légère; Et alignez-le selon vos compétences.
Et lorsque vous avez terminé votre travail, prenez deux bandes de bois tournées qui enveloppent la jambe de chaque côté, et qu'elles soient aussi longues que la jambe du genou jusqu'en bas;
then wrap in two places with one bandage on top and one below, and tie it in the middle as well. In this manner, the leg will not be able to bend to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
and some place a stick along the length of the leg, which is made of wood, and they put the leg in to prevent movement. Properly, this is done in a fracture where there is an injury;
and each day they move the leg to see if there is an abscess or any other incident; if the treatment continues until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the foot bones
At the ankle, there is no fracture, but sometimes the foot bones break and the two bones, and in this case, it happens more often as a shattering in various ways.
And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones surpassing one another, then place the sick person's foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and now put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
Then put the poultice and wool on top, and place under the foot a small table with two full feet, then bind the foot tightly, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things you need.
And when three days or four have passed, then dislocate the ligament, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the two broken, then restore them, as we have said for the hands; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot that small table I mentioned, and bind it tightly;
and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the table under the foot; And let it stand on top of the head of the table away from the stomach of the foot, so that it grasps well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have spoken of before; and treat each case as it is necessary.
of the bone of the wrist
When the bone of a woman's natural birth is broken, let her sit widened, then incline it towards the back, and hold it from behind;
then fill the woman's natural birth cavity with cotton, and put as much in as is necessary.
then make the woman stand up and raise her back little by little, and thus the cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance of the birth, and the bone will return with the cotton. 
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton; when she has finished, replace it, and do this for seven days or so. then the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a cord to its opening, and insert it entirely into the vulva. then blow strongly into the cord until the bladder is inflated inside. thus the fracture will return to its natural position.
then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for some days until it is healed.
And when the bone of a man's or woman's wrist is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the hip bone.
And these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and practice into it, and understand my book.
For the fracture indicates in many cases the right way for restoration Therefore, understand this.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose neck and put the penis in it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or until it heals quickly.
of breaking with wound
It is necessary for someone who has a breaking with wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be cauterized immediately, so that the cauteries that we have mentioned prove it.
And if the wound heals, then seal it with vitriol, if you have nothing else; then begin again to restore the break in that same hour, or that day, if no abscess forms there.
And if an abscess forms there, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is calmed; and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause evil to come.
And if the broken bone is protruding from the surface of the skin, then you must handle it lightly with your hands, with slight extension.
And if the extension is not ready to be put equally in your hands, then use this iron instrument which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to prepare three or four, according to how many he will need for each fracture treatment;
And let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, and let it be pointed at the front, and thick from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called "palanche," for which reason the curved head should be placed on top of the visible bone; and strike it once, so that it returns, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well take the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone, so that the instrument has power over it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then strike it with a suitable instrument for this purpose, either an incision tool or a saw, to your ability;
then remove that which remains in the bone by scraping and fine shavings.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
If it is so that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth in black stringent wine, and carefully if it is in summer. And do not put any greasy ointment or other oil on the wound, lest it brings about putrefaction and corruption.
Then administer steel when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the dressing all around it, according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not constricted with the splint.
And many times have foolish doctors done this, causing either death or corruption in the patient. And let the splint be softer and gentler than other fractures.
Et si la plaie est grande ou mauvaise, et tu crains qu'un accident ne survienne, comme nous l'avons dit, et tu trouves de la douleur à cet endroit, alors il ne faut pas appliquer d'étoupes; mais envoloupe autour de la plaie, au lieu d'étoupes, des linges durs, et les attache.
And when you see after one day or two that the swelling begins to grow on the wound, then remove everything you have put on in all haste, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as tetracycline ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you unbind the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and cured.
And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone descends lightly.
And if many days pass and it cannot be joined together but the bone returns again, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must explore the wound with a probe, and remove all these loose pieces that cause this pain.
And if an ulcer comes to the place, or another manner of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in this chapter before.
Et quant l'os est cassé et perce à travers le membre, comme l'os de la cuisse ou de l'épaule, ainsi que d'autres grands membres similaires, ne le retire pas, car souvent cela entraîne la mort. Mais laisse-le en place jusqu'à ce qu'il pourrisse;
par aventure il tombera de lui-même après vingt jours ou trente, puis soigne la plaie, si tu le peux;
And if you cannot, then leave it.
We often find ourselves after the health of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and the appearance of the limb is bad to see; and by chance the member cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care then if the bone is fresh: if you administer astringent medicines to him, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take some of these things, or all together, and cook them with stiptic wine or plenty of egg or honey; 》 and place them on the wound in bandages, and bind it well, and do not unbind for many days;
and place them on the wound in bandages, and bind it well, and do not unbind for many days; And then it dislocates again, and starts another, until the dislocation is gone;
Or you stretch it over a well-made piece of wood; Because the property of wood is that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
And if the dislocation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then scrape over it, and make the excess visible; Or you shave it with a scraper until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
of the limb which is weak after the healing
When the fracture of the bone is set, but afterwards the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons: One reason is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; Or because there were too many ligaments, and nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to excessive movement, not at its proper time; or because he has little blood in his body, he is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and soften the body until the blood increases in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and happiness;
then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts great nourishment to it, and frequently wash it with warm water until the nourishment reaches the limb; ние and it returns to its natural shape.
About the twisted limb after healing When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is visible, and the shape of the limb is unsightly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb again entirely, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
and these actions are blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death.
nevertheless, if the swelling and the pain are recent, it is necessary that they be bathed in hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of plantain, roots, and marshmallow, and similar things;
and make a softening plaster, as well-made Diasculon, and you take the mucilage of plantain, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top.
When you take fat figs, grind them with colon seed, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And sometimes the dislocation is removed by continuously and vigorously rubbing with moist hands. And let there be gentle movement applied to the member each hour.
And if the hardness and rigidity are like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with an iron instrument, then you must cut it down to the bone gently with a fine incision. and put poultices and plasters on the wound.
Dislocation is the displacement of a joint from its proper place, so that it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs in someone, they must be brought back to sense immediately. ‌
For if one delays, then the place swells, and perhaps it is hardly put back in place;
therefore it should not be moved at the time when it is swollen: many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
however, when this happens, make the patient sweat, then leave him until the abscess subsides;
Then bathe the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as it comes into its place.
And I have arranged the chapters of the dislocations from the head down to the feet.
It often happens that the jaws are dislocated together, and the dislocation of both is according to two methods. either they are slightly removed from their places, and softened a little or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the chest, and the patient drools from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and the tongue is wrapped with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself in many ways.
And if it is complete and full, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
and in such a way that the assistant holds the patient's head, and the doctor puts a little finger of one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts And let the other two fingers of the hands be lacking, to make it equal.
And instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all directions. And the doctor should set it equally, until it returns to its place.
And if the jaw is swollen, even if it is both jaws together, then rinse them with hot water and oil until they are lightly reset.
Do not delay in treating the swelling, as we have said.
And when they are equally reset, and the patient's mouth closes well without slackening, then place moistened cloths on top, made with rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bands.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows, so that they do not move it to the right or left, nor should they try to chew, but take only light food until the pain is relieved and the jaws are healed.
And then he chews what he wants lightly, and does not labor to open his mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well knitted and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be set right within an hour and are not restored to their proper places, fever and abscesses follow, and perhaps a ruptured bowel, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a disaster; and many times he who experiences it dies within nine days.
The armpit cannot dislocate from the inside of the body or from the hip, and sometimes it is dislocated by force, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and bindings, and tighten them;
and the head which is towards the knife cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it ever dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said;
Then apply the plaster and bind it, and hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until healed.
And in the same way is reduced the head of the shoulder when it has been dislocated from its place.
of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is only dislocated according to three methods:
one of which is when it dislocates down towards the lower part of the armpit; and the second is towards the side of the chest; and sometimes it dislocates upwards, which happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate backwards due to the shoulder, nor inwards due to the nerves;
and many times it dislocates downwards towards the armpit, especially in those who have little flesh, for with them it jumps up quickly;
at those who have enough flesh, though it is barely so, and enters with difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to some men due to injury or breakage, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain about it. And then begin the treatment.
The dislocation is known when it descends towards the shoulder blade and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear diversity between them. And you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and under the shoulder blade, at the back, the head of the shoulder as if it were an egg. And the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor can he make any movement.
Similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the back.
And this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the manner is that the caregiver lifts the hand of the patient up, then places their fingers underneath the arm, and lifts the joint with force up to its place. And the caregiver lifts the hand, and extends it upward, then places it underneath; so that it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in a few days afterwards, then the patient must be bathed in hot water. and the caregiver should gently soften and soothe it, as with a decoction of hops and fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it.
Then let the patient lie on his back, and place under the buttocks a pad of cloth, neither too soft nor too hard. Then the physician places his heel on the pad, lifts the head of the shoulder skillfully, and pulls the hand of the patient;
and another assistant holds the patient's head so that it does not move downward; that shoulder will return immediately, and if you see this, you should reset it in this manner:
and it is necessary for there to be a man present who is larger than the patient. and he should stand next to the patient's side, and push his shoulder under the patient's buttocks, and lift the buttocks up high, so that the patient hangs in the air. And another minister draws the patient's hand down towards the belly. And if the patient is too weak, then some heavy object should be placed with him, and the dislocation will return now.
And one resets it in another manner:
and it is as if one drives a long log into the ground, so that the head is as round as a fist, neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but with soft cloths on top, and the patient should be standing alongside the log;
then his hand should be stretched down strongly from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: take a log of two feet in length and four inches in width, which has the head round to easily enter deeply under the saddle, according to this form:
Then lay it on the patient's head under a cloth so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then place it under the patient's pillow.
And extend one arm along the length of the stick, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the top of the hand, then place the arm on the rung of a ladder, and let the hand hang down, and let the body hang from the other side. The joint will return to its proper place now.
And when it is in place, whichever way it may be, you must put underneath the seat an equal sphere of wool, then apply the plaster prepared with mill powder, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it. Then fasten it securely under the seat, and turn the ligature over the plaster, and encircle the hand around its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And he should move it little by little, until the limb is comfortable, for it will heal faster;
and then move it more after five or seven days, and move it. And if it is immobile and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the juncture is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply cauteries to three places, as is described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm above, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocations that are towards the foot and ankles, or behind, are done by pushing and stretching with the hands, and another ligament is administered there.
and care for it until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes stiffness in the limb, and slowness in movement, then let the patient take many baths until that stiffness is relieved, and it returns to its original condition.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder joint is easily dislocated and easily returns;
and it can be dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not hidden, because one can see it well and feel it well. And it dislocates according to each joint. And when you join the sick member with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. Because the joint is dislocated, and he cannot bend his arm, nor can he touch his shoulder at all.
And you must reset it before any abscesses form there, because if abscesses were to form, it would be difficult to restore.
and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is in the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and perhaps death will occur.
And the restoration is such that when it is in a position where it can be reset, you should extend its hand with both of your hands; and the arm should be spread out, and place your hands according to the length around, above and below, and press the joint together, at its base or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is forward, then it returns when he folds his hand to his hand, and strikes the root of the palm with the knife that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer a strong extension.
and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension.
then turn the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
and when the master joins the joint with his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint firmly until it returns.
and when it is in place, then apply a dry plaster with some egg white, and press firmly, and bandage the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then unbandage it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, unbind the ligament, and let it go;
and if you see that the joint does not stretch well, then restart the bandage and the ligament, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set. then unbind it.
And if after the joint is reset he feels tightness and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved. or you put a greasy sheepskin over the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter the bath. and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the sheepskin back on, and then enter the bath. And do this two or three times, until it is healed;
and if you see (this), then place moist, warm cow dung with butter on top, and bind it up;
it will return to its proper place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the relocation is light, more than other joints. However, it must be returned to its place immediately, in the same hour that it is dislocated, before the place becomes swollen, or a hot abscess forms.
And the relocation is done by placing the diseased hand on a table, and the assistant extends his hand, and the doctor places his hand in line with it, so that he puts his palm over the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must check if it is in place. Then have the patient lay their back on a table for extension and flexion. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then let the patient place the back of their hand on a table, and let the physician place his hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, that's good. If not, then apply soothing plasters for abscesses like these, and leave it alone without repeating.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains misaligned.
And this does not harm the patient any more than while the hand is wet, and cannot grasp anything at all. Then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries.
If there is no other means than to restrain by fire cautery near the case, and perhaps it does not matter otherwise.
And when the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for 5 days, then unbind and let it be thus.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is some stiffness, then moisten it with hot water and rub until it is healthy.
Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the wrist.
then extend the finger, and push the dislocation towards your pockets until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated.
and leave it for two days, and then put it back in place on the third day.
and bind it tightly as we have said, and unbind it each day, and make it move, and rebind it tight.
and do this often, until it is healed, and do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and proceed as you have done before, until it is healed.
And do likewise when it is dislocated on another side.
of the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several dislocations, there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the excretion jumps out without wanting to, and cannot be held, and often some members are softened, whether both thighs or both arms or one.
And often the spine moves in four parts;
that which moves to the back is called "scoliosis":
the remedy for this is to reduce it if the scoliosis has come from childhood: then there is no remedy or healing for it all.
And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancients speak of remedies in grand words, where there is not always great benefit;
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have made instruments in various ways.
I say that in the jaundice that affects the breast first, there is no sense or health;
and so it is with jaundice that comes directly to the two sides, and one cannot cure it except for that which comes specifically to the back, as I say;
and let the patient be laid on his side in an equal place, and have support beneath him, so that he does not injure himself;
then drive a stake into the ground at the head and another at the feet, and tie one cord beneath the patient's saddle, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
And two assistants know the bonds, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two torches.
And let them be well fastened, the torches as we have said, and the physician shall place his palms on the spine strongly, until it returns.
And if it does not return with this treatment, then take a board three arms long, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and thrust the head of the board under the patient, then put the middle of the board upon the spine. And let the physician place his feet on the other end of the board, and press strongly, until it returns to its place.
And if you see (it), do the same for the vertebra that turns towards the hand. And it is that you place two faggots at the head of the patient with one arm outstretched, and towards the feet another two, and let there be between each faggot, above and below, a palm's length of distance.
and let there be in each faggot one hole, where the spindle runs through, and let the faggots be firmly in the ground, so that they do not move.
and between each two faggots let there be one turning faggot, on which the rope turns, and in the two turnings let there be two small faggots of a palm's length, to turn the spindle.
and then tie the rope that is among the axles to the spindle towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other spindle, and each of the helpers turns his spindle all the way to the end of the rope, and the master places the spine equal as we have said.
And when it is healed, place a desiccating plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the wool, and then a strip from a tablet three fingers long, which covers the area of jaundice and the healthy part of the spleen, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and let the patient use nourishment subtly, until he is healed;
and if anything happens at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medications, along with the strip that we have mentioned before. and sometimes a piece of lead is administered, and sometimes it appears in the lower part of the back, and one might think that this is a dislocation. And this is the bone that is exposed, which is why one should not have any presumption. by chance it might bring death.
Know that in the joints of the hip and shoulder, only dislocation occurs, not like other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back;
and more inside than outside, and it dislocates little in front and behind.
And the sign of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee is more open than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double his knee. And it is the place that is inflamed with an abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the signs of those to whom it happens accidentally, are that these incidents are contrary to those mentioned before.
And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that he straightens his leg according to its full length; nevertheless, the knee does not bend without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and he retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he goes, he walks on his heels.
And the signs of those to whom it happens behind, are that they cannot stretch their knee, or double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hipbone is in the place below the ribs.
The treatment for this type of dislocation is that you wait if the dislocation is old, and it stays in its place, then there is no need for any treatment; and he should not have excessive confidence.
And in the case of fresh dislocation, and this is one of the four types of dislocation, you should hurry to turn the joint, and it goes inside and outside, and moves to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
And if it does not return this way, then you must have a strong assistant, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with one rope that is tied above the knee; and another assistant should extend his hand in such a way that he places his hands under the patient's heels, then pull with a soft rope on the hip; and another holds the end of the rope.
And they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then one must take care of its likeness.
When the dislocation is in the hip, you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put the ligament at the root of the thigh, and the place that is under the groin, then stretch the ligament upwards towards the groin, and towards the pelvis.
Then take another assistant to hold his arms, and embrace the thick part of the dislocated thigh, and stretch it with great force. And it will return to its place now.
And this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have described, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligament at the two ankles and at the two knees, and let the injured leg be extended two fingers' width more than the other;
then they should be hung over the top of a pole, and let it be suspended from the ground by two arm lengths;
then instruct one assistant to embrace the patient's thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who should firmly embrace the thigh, for now the joint is returning rapidly.
And when the dislocation is reduced, let the patient lie down as we have said for one who has gout, and tighten the ligament on the injured leg properly, and also on the foot;
Then place two torches, one at the head and another at the feet. Then insert a torch between the thighs of the patient in the same manner. And have cloths soaked in water placed around it, to prevent the patient from being burned. Then let each assistant approach him, and let the doctor place his hand on the dislocation evenly with it.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.
If not, place the patient on a table and press as we have said in the case of dislocation, and let the patient lie on their sound side.
And when the dislocation is in front, then the sick leg must be extended quickly, as I have said; and let the doctor place his weight on the sick shoulder, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, then the sick one should not be extended downward or lifted from the ground, but rather he should lie as if his hip were dislocated to the back, as we have said about lying on two hips; And let it be on his face, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and someone should press on the joint at the table. And it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even. Then bring the thighs together and apply a poultice, and hold it with a bandage, so that the hip does not move. And rest for three days or four, then dislocate it again, and apply another poultice on top.
And if you see that they are even, then hold them as before, and leave it for three days.
Then dislocate it again, and let the patient walk gently until the limb is healed.
of the knee dislocation
The knee is dislocated according to three ways: this means, from within and without, and from behind.
and does not dislocate in front.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet.
then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your two [hands], then strongly bend the two sides of the knee. and another assistant extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he easily reaches his thigh lightly.
And place the poultice on it, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then unbind.
And let the patient not try to walk until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The ankles are sometimes swollen and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen and protrudes towards the dislocated part:
The reduction is light, and it should be gently extended with his hands when it is only moved slightly.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and hold him with one hand by the leg, above the ankle;
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with the left two times, then extend it upwards, and nicely push the foot up.
And do this twice, as we have said, by pressing and pulling the foot.
If it returns, that is good;
if not, then start the work again, for it will return;
And if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly drive a stake into the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around so that they do not harm the patient.
Then let one minister take the thigh, and another minister extend the foot in their hands or with a strap tied above the ankle. Then let each minister extend equally, and let the stake remain between the patient's thighs to hold the patient while they are stretched.
Then let the physician make the dislocation equal with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is perfectly in place, put the plaster and bandages on top, and bind it strongly, and tie the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligature is not too tight;
then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, bind it again;
Then unbind it on the third or fourth day, and allow the patient to walk for four days; And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if such abscesses occur, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of the two When the fingers are dislocated, they must be carefully extended without effort, and this is a simple matter.
And if the dislocation is in any knot of the foot's back, then you must make the patient sit on the plain place or on a table straight, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press strongly with your foot until it returns.
And when it is equal and nothing opens, place under the sole of the foot a two-legged table, then strongly press it down, and leave it for three days, then dislocate it. And make him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, it often happens that the patient dies.
Do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and patient, but rather bold.
and use at the beginning of soothing things a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope for health; and when you see hope, then immediately reset the limb in place before the hot abscess arrives.
and when the limb is in place, then administer soothing things for the hot abscess, and treat the wound with dried onions as needed.
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are exposed, then remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
and beware of entering a path of fear, as I have said, for this will move you according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body.
