O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its completion, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its clarifications. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
And because the work of hands is lacking in our region and is foreign from beginning to end, the knowledge has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except for small descriptions in the books of the ancients which have been changed by hand. And from this come errors and vanities, and intentions are closed off, and knowledge is distanced.
Or it seems to me that I wish to bring life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanation, declaration, and abbreviation. And I will bring together the forms of the fire tongs for cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the arrangement of the declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected. And it is necessary for those who undertake this to be proficient in the science of anatomy, as Galen said, so that they know the arrangement of the members, and their shapes and connections and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of holes, and the movement and rest of the veins, and the place of their origin.
And therefore Hippocrates said that the name with the name is very much, but with the work it is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
In the beginning of this book we tell you that if one is not knowledgeable about the aforementioned things, let him beware lest he fall into error and harm men;
So I have seen many times that some who engage in this science abandon their knowledge and judgment through experience.
For I saw a foolish physician who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and also cut the arteries of the neck; causing so much blood to come out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another physician who removed a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; and he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well if one cut it off he would die.
And I saw another physician who took into his care a duke of our land whose leg was broken and had an open wound; ‌
and the ignorant physician, using strong force, sets the fracture on the wound of the stars, leaving no trace of flesh on the wound, and leaves it thus unfinished.
and he ordered that she not be released at all;
and so it remained until the leg was completely swollen, along with the foot, which became gangrenous.
I was called to come to him, and I hurried to go and release the leg; and when I had released it, she found peace and felt no pain.
But still, corruption was already established in the limb, and it could not be healed.
and the corruption did not stop spreading through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
And I saw another physician who pierced an abscess and then ignited it due to the wickedness of his practice.
Because when a cancer is purged of black bile, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corruption can be completely removed.
Et pour cela, très cher fils, il vous est nécessaire de savoir que l'œuvre des mains est divisée en deux parties : et oevre ou n'est pas de peril, ne de danger.
Et ou il n'a mie paor ne peril, mais ou il est biaus et saluables.
car mult es garceus qui n'ont pas l'art, mais se font savoir, et font plusors mauvaises oevres, einsi comme il n’i aient mie, por ceu que il n'entendent mie les choses.
et li pueples vous aimera por vos bons fais, si que nus ne puet faire mesque bonnes oevres.
And let the frightening diseases go away from serious illness;
And remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his warnings: “Do not take on the care of serious illnesses, lest you be called a foolish physician.”
I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and hot medicinal cautery, and this chapter is arranged from the head to the feet;
And of the shapes of the instruments, and the handling of the cautery, and of all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cups [for bloodletting], and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things. ️
And this chapter is organized and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar things;
And it is organized from the head down to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Thus, as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to speak of the quality of the help and of the harmfulness of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of aid, and of harm, is the longest speech and the most subtle science and secret response;
And on this many of the wise have spoken, and they agreed upon it.
And I am ashamed of my words, for I fear length.
I say that cautery universally helps all complexions where there is matter, except two complexions: That is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In a hot and dry constitution together with matter, some have said that fire cautery is of great help; And others say the opposite: That fire cautery does not benefit diseases that come from heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat hot diseases by heat, nor dryness.
And those who say the opposite claim that fire cautery greatly helps hot and dry diseases that occur in the human body. For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true by experience.
Nevertheless, no one should interfere with it except for those who have experienced it, and know through long practice the chapter on fire cautery, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the predispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and the passage of time;
des autres complexions n’avons nous point peur, principalement en maladies froides et humides. And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
And know, son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and more beneficial than cautery with burning medicine.
For fire is simple, and does not spread to any other member except the one that is burned, unless it can.
The hot medicines spread from one member to another and cause serious illness in the affected member; And perhaps kill the patient.
The fire, due to its power and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is an excess.
And this I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, which is based on the truth of things.
And for this reason I apologize for the length of my speech, because it is not pleasing to me that I should reveal the secret which lies in fire and the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from the body, as the philosophers say when they demonstrate. Or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prietens.
And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harm that occurs is suppressed by the help of cautery; and especially if the cautery is necessary to alleviate pain quickly, before the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
And never think of it like this, dear son, as foolish doctors do; because the disease that is healed by cautery does not recur; and they say it like this;
and they say it like this; but it is not as they think, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the temperament, and dries up the humors which cause pain, and is more effective than medicine for its quick action, and for the power of its work and its dominance.
And it is possible that the illness may come sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the place of the disease and its power.
And the superfluous substances are gathered in him by the consumption of food and similar things, unless there are cauteries administered in places where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as dental cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return. but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and that is true.
but they do not believe that cauteries are worthwhile after medication, but their intentions are false; and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in some illnesses and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cauteries of gold instruments are more beneficial than those of iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
and they said that the place of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have tested it and found that it is true in some men;
and gold cauteries are more beneficial than iron ones, as they said. And yet when you heat a gold instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
and if one heats it too much; it melts in the fire. And thus there are many hindrances.
I have arranged this chapter from the head to the feet so that it may be easier to find the path.
This cautery is used for moisture and coldness of the brain, and there are two types done for this reason: one caused by an illness called "soda," and another caused by many humors descending from the head to the eyes, ears, and due to excessive dreaming, toothache, sore throat, and especially all illnesses that come from coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a solvent medicine, cleansing three or four times, according to what the patient's strength, age, and habit allow. And then make the patient’s head bald.
And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his knees;
after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes. And there, where your fingers will be, cause the blood to flow first; then heat the cautery which is called "olivare," and this is its form. And place it on the designated spot with ink, and make descending and constricting your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand immediately, and return to the spot if you see the bone move slightly; and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
after that take a little bit of silk, and put inside soft cotton, and place it on the spot, and let it remain for three days;
then apply a moistened cloth in butter; and leave it until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmacon", until it is healed.
And it was said by the ancients, that when the wound remains open longer, it drains more. and therefore such movements are helpful.
And some of them said that one should let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then scrape off what has been burned from the bone, and treat it.
And others say that one should let the cautery stay so long, and push it in so hard that one digs into the bone as wide as a spindle that women put in their distaffs, so that the humors may be moved out.
and one should let the wound remain open for a long time; afterwards, one should cure and sew it up.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except for certain people where there is fear;
and it seems to me that I should leave it alone.
car the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we have seen in other members;
and likewise when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and beneficial for me, I use this work together with healing.
When chronic pain comes to the whole head and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochie", and of purging the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have said before, and it does not work. Take care if the head of the patient is very strong by nature, and if it is too cold; Then cauterize under that cautery with a little bit that we have mentioned above. Then make a cautery on top of each horn of the head down to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place that is called "vessels". And this is the place where one applies cupping glasses. And lift your hand so that you do not see the bone at all: The patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere.
And the cauteries of the horns should be more subtle than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is its form:
of the head When a sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the eye is purged by purging medicines, and other cures that I have mentioned in the division of illnesses are done, and none of this helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, that is to say with liquid medicine and with fire.
The cautery with liquid medicine is done by taking a cup of aloes, removing the bark and pouring the cup into two cups of water. Then make an incision in the place where the pain is such that you can respond to the aloe juice under the skin;
and when it has been applied, then bind it well and leave it thus for twelve hours. And then unbind it and draw out the aloe juice, and leave the wound thus for two days or three. Then apply a cloth soaked in butter on top until the pustule emerges.
After the treatment of swelling until it is healed;
and if you see this, make some of the burning medicines that I have written in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the cautery of whatever shape it has.
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a nail with a hole for a pin, and in the middle there is a small opening.
and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the iron a little lightly, until half the thickness of the cure is burnt.
and lift your hand so that the part outside does not burn, and let there be an abundance of blood flow out.
Afterwards, place cotton in vinegar, and put it on the spot for three days; then I place moistened cotton in butter, and then cure the swollen area until it is healed.
and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cutting," do so at the tip, and be careful not to cut the artery in this migraine which is not old.
of migraine
When you cure a migraine as we have said before in the division of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the previously mentioned cautery of medicine and iron does not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cutting" until it is white.
and thus on the painful place a line of half two in length, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cut the artery and do not come to the bone.
And guard against the jawbone that moves when eating, and the nerve should not be regarded so that it does not move or cause spasm in the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery when it is cut, where there is great fear in the cutting, and likewise for those who are unfamiliar with it and are not students or experienced. And leave the work halfway;
But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it belongs in this book.
And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient can endure it, cauterize in the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
And if you see, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on artery extraction, along with a cautery that has two knives. And this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
of the earache from cold
When there is ear pain from cold, and one has tried medicinal solutions and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called "puncture", of which here is the form:
Then prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place. And let there be ten pricks around each ear;
Afterwards, treat the place until it is healed.
Of the mouth's torment
The torture that must be cured by cautery comes only from those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases.
And do not perform cautery on similar ones that come from drying out or numbness of nerves.
When you cure this kind of torture that comes from fever of the liver and purgings of the head and gargling, and it is not effective, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little below the temple, and the third between the two lips;
and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and have him cauterized at the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger. and let the cautery remain until half of the head is burnt;
And this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the knife that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary for the knife to be a little larger;
after curing the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When the apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
And let it be treated as we have said before.
of lead
For this disease, one must give the patient large doses of purgative pills to cleanse the brain;
then wash the patient's head thoroughly, and place on the back of his neck a mustard plaster as described in the treatise on plasters;
and this is the way to apply the cautery: If you do so as I have said.
If he is healed in this way, it is good; and if he is not, let him make three cauteries on the head, descending to the neck, with two fingers' width between each cautery;
and treat it as the others, and if you see a swelling, and the patient is tolerant, make one cautery in the middle; And if necessary, two more on the two horns, and care for it until it is healed.
And let the cautery be called an "olivare," as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hair and what we have said before;
after shaving the patient's head, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, one behind and three on the spine of the neck.
And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is able to endure it, and the disease is severe, then make four cauteries on the spine of the back. And let it burn until the most of the heart (wound) is burnt, and then lift your hand. Aprés le cure tant qu'il soit sanéz, et soit li cautères qui est apelez "olivare" que nos avons devant dit.
of epilepsy
The epileptics should not use the cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to purify the brain with years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and willing to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne. et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.
If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery in this manner:
When due to melancholy the superfluities or corrupt moisture and thick phlegm are present, then use the cautery of hot irons as we have said for those who have paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities are inclined towards melancholy and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink that will cleanse his brain according to what was previously mentioned in the division.
After lifting the head of the patient; then make a good linen tourniquet, like a circle, and place it on the head;
and let the patient sit cross-legged, and be well held from all sides;
then bring the linen cloth, and use old sheep butter for it; › and heat with gentle fire, so that the two may be poured into it without harming. then empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool down;
and do this to the patient once every week with other good treatment until he is cured.
In performing cautery, make several incisions throughout the entire cautery process.
This method of moist heat balances the brain equally; › ›
And then apply cotton soaked in butter and goose fat.
from the fear of pain When fear first comes to the eyes due to the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something that cleanses the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make them sweat in a bath several times on an empty stomach.
After that, instruct him to turn his head back, and make a cautery in the middle of his head, and make two cauteries on both temples if the descent is in both eyes together, or one if it is in one.
and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the skull, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temples.
And beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of the artery and at the incision, the precaution with which you will staunch it;
And sometimes one performs cautery or hot iron underneath the two rear bones.
And if it is seen that this is from cold phlegmatic excesses, then make the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of the eye, descending to the eyes. I make a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two hot iron cauteries underneath the two bones. And if more is needed, then cauterize it wisely above the eyebrows with a small cautery.
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and he does not benefit from it at all, then give the patient three nights of cooked barley. And after the king, the head, and he performs a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped burn. And makes two cauteries of the type called "clavilis" on the two sore spots, a little below the eyebrows.
And beware of the artery so that you do not cover it.
And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivare". To what form here is this?
And if you see this, make two cauteries on the two sore spots as long as the sore spots are.
And do not leave your hand there except until a third of the skin is burnt, as I have said.
The hair that stings the eye Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eye is turned toward the eyelid and pricks the eye, and in this case one makes cauteries in two ways: This is to say by fire, or by burning medicine.
Or instruct the patient that he should let the hairs grow long and even. And if they prick at their base, let him hold his eyes still so that they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and are even, then put the patient in your health. After that, on the skin of the eyes place a figure that is like the leaves of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs. PERTY
Then put a piece of cotton soaked in egg white and powdered pepper on the eye, then heat the cauterizer which has this form:
After you have cauterized on the face where you have punctured a little at a time many times, let the heart be burned in that spot.
and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the skin drawn back, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye.
then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton soaked in butter until the burn is gone. after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come back and the skin is softened then begin the cautery on that same spot again, just as you did before.
and if the hairs are lacking, then cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The burning medical cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even. Then make a form of paper in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
then take French soap and alive coal, each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the form you have made like the myrtle leaf, and place it on the eyelids. And if the disease is in one eye only, then one should work on that one, and if in both, likewise. and place cotton soaked in egg white under the eye.
and the patient's eye should be in your healthy hand, and place your finger on top of the medication, and press one time and lift all the times that the patient feels burning from the medication, for they feel burning as if by fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your finger. And when the biting is over, then lift the skin with a needle, and look to see if the skin is raised as it would be by the constriction of fire or by an incision. And if it is so, then it is well.
If not, then apply more medicine to the place until your workings are equal and your eyes focused.
Then place a piece of butter-soaked cotton on the burned area until the heart of the burn is cooled; afterwards, treat the wound with ointments called "diaphenes" and others, until it is healed.
And if you need to be very careful with your work so that not even a little bit of the medicine gets into your eyes.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards and the hair pricks inwards, then begin the treatment again on that place which is softened by the skin, just as you did before. After the treatment until he is healed;
and this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and in smallness, according to this should be your constraints;
and may not be answered the right way to him who studies this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cautery
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make a cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your hand; and let the assistant hold the patient's head between his hands in such a way that it does not move, nor remove his head;
then place moist cotton soaked in egg white or juice of parsley on the eye;
then heat the cautery which is such:
and it is carved at the tip like the shape of a peacock feather, along with the handle being the cautery;
If you see it, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you see it, let it be like a tent.
But nonetheless, this one that is chosen is better for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, extract the pus and dry it out; And if it is closed, then incise it, and draw outwards from below.
Then place a very hot cauterizer on top, and hold your hand on the cauterizer near the nose below the eye, so that your hand does not slip. And put the cauterizer in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you proceed with the cautery to the bone, it would be good. If not, then begin the cautery again once more, or another one if you need to, and leave it for three days.
after which he puts on a moistened cotton swab with butter, and the care of the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without healing, then he puts on a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed. and the king according to what he would find in his chapter.
And there is a manner of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients said. Cut into an abscess, and open the place; then put into the slit one subtle mixture of this form: and make it in the quantity of one third of a pound; and hold your hand firmly on the mixture, and let the patient not move at all, until the melted lead runs to his eye.
and it is necessary that one puts on the patient's eye a cotton swab moistened in egg white or water.
The arrow sinks so deep into the place of the fistula, and the vein by a marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then one must administer a piercing to the nose, and return the fistula to the body of the nose according to what is proper in its own place.
from cracks in the lips Much often happen crevices in lips called "hair", and likewise in the lips of children.
When you treat these crevices as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery knife according to this form:
And quickly put it in those crevices until it reaches the bottom.
After curing the place of the wound until it is healed.
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the mouth, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterwards it causes putrefaction and rot and becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula. and you cure it as we have said in sections, and it does not help at all: then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the size of the fistula. after the opening or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron goes to the bottom of it, and in the rear place.
And do this once or twice after the treatment of what we have said for treatment, until it is healed.
and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then place the patient's head in your lap; ︎ after heat the cautery whose form will come here next in such a way that you place a reed on the tooth; ︎ ︎
and put inside the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth;
After, lift your hand and renew the cautery according to your will;
After, let the patient fill his mouth with salted water, and hold it for an hour until it is rich in juices.
And in this manner the tooth that was moving is thus made firm, and the softened gum is restricted, and the moisture that was corrupting it dries up.
of tooth pain
When toothache comes from coldness, whether it is true or imagined, and medical treatments are not effective, then there is need for cautery in two ways: And cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautery with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and put the tip on an iron or copper spoon; After take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent (i.e., a needle or similar instrument), and moisten it with boiled butter, and place it quickly on the aching tooth, and hold it until it is cooled down;
And thus it often happens that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth; and if you see it so wet, put cold butter on wool and cotton, and place it on the aching tooth, and apply hot iron until the fire reaches the end of the tooth.
The cautery with fire is such that you should take an iron or copper rod, and let it be thick enough so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
After heating the cautery, from which the form will come later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand there until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next day.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during this cautery, and then rinse strongly;
and it is the form of the cautery:
And make a cautery with whatever head you want, according to what you have power [to do];
and this is the form of the caustic [substance]:
of scrofula When the scrofulae are of cold and moist phlegm, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the caustic made from what follows is the form, and let it have two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side of the cautery; 》
and place the hot caustic on the abscess once, or twice as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
And if the abscess is small, apply a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it there for three days. And place a damp cloth soaked in butter over it until the burn is gone;
afterwards, treat the area with onion and honey until it is healed.
When moisture prevails over the channels of the brain, and especially when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged by purgative medicines;
afterwards, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go as far as the throat, but only a little way.
Afterwards, make another cautery at the junction of the neck with the top of the spine, and let this cautery be called "clavicle," from which we have the form before;
And treat the place as we have said before, until it is healed.
When all and the disease of the stomach are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the stomach in nearby places. And another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts;
And let the cautery which is called "clavicle" be according to the shape that was said before.
And if you see fit, make a cautery by pricking the entire cautery which is called "point" in the form that is shown here before for the disease of the ears.
And let there be as many as thirty points, or however many are needed.
After curing the area according to what has been said before, and let the cautery be at three times according to this form:
And because these cauteries are lighter, therefore you make them in three doses.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterwards, instruct the patient to lie on his back and on his side; afterwards lift up the heart which is inside with your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has two nerves where it looks like this:
and cauterize the heart until you pierce it to the side, and there will be four cauteries together with the figure of the cautery;
and because of this, the cautery is made with the three-nerved cautery, so that the figures of the cauterization are six cauteries;
and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the three-nerved cautery:
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Afterward, place the cautery on the surface and grind it with silk. Afterward, make the patient rest, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well healed.
And if it is dislocated on top, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery, or make many cauteries by pricking.
Because the joint is healed and the moisture is removed and the patient is cured.
When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture to the point that it draws from his complexion, and he has many catarrhs, and in the usual manners of treatment he does not improve at all, then it is necessary for the patient to be turned on his back, and extend his legs and his hands. xspace After this, make three cauteries: one under the heel of the foot by the quantity of a thumb, making the entire cautery flat, and two cauteries on each side such that the shape of the cauteries forms three angles, with enough space between them that they do not touch each other when they drip pus.
and the cauteries should be so deep that they pierce the two parts of the heart, and the shape of the cauteries should be according to this form without touching each other.
And if you see someone cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and pressing on the stomach at this point according to the quantity that you see of it; then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "point".
Après le cure de la cure que nous avons eue devant, tant qu'il soit sané.
When it comes to the liver, pain comes from cold and moisture and great flatulence, so much so that it is removed from its natural complexion by excesses; xspace and the patient is cured of that which we have said in sections, and it does not benefit him at all, then the patient must be purged on his liver; And make a sign of three cauteries in this form and shape and quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondrium, where the ribs of the man come.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger; And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand too much on all the cautery;
And only burn half of the cautery, and let the patient stand on his feet.
And if he cannot, then let him be lying down, extending his legs and raising his arms;
And if you wish, then cauterize these cauteries with a surgical instrument, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn all the way through, for you would dry out the entire body. And let it not reach boiling point, for the heart is very delicate in that spot, and you should know this well.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain, but not too intense;
And if it is in the membrane, the pain is madness-inducing.
And then, when this treatment should be performed by physicians, the patient must lie on their back.
And then sign the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a grape, as shown in this figure: And he cauterizes with a cautery until the heart is burnt, and it reaches up to the spleen, so that all the flesh is burnt out.
after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until he is healed;
and it is not fitting that anyone use this cautery except one who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whom many of these diseases have been cured at some point.
Then he can boldly work, yet it seems to me that it is better to leave him alone.
of the fire brand for treating wounds
The ancients said that one must make plasters with cauteries of the roots of aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your thumb. And the wetness with oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the part that is under the beard;
And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning slightly behind; And one cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two at the ribs of the chest opposite the cautery that is between the shoulders;
And do not press with your hand, but make it openly as if smelling.
And some ancients said that some people use a fire-cautery resembling a razor, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess; And suddenly, a pain outside, as we have said concerning the abscess of the liver.
But in this work there is fear that the patient dies immediately or a fistula develops which cannot be healed.
of the bladder
When you treat the bladder disease as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
Of which there is a manner such that you should make three or four cauterizations, in rows according to the length of the vein, following the pattern of the liver cautery that we have mentioned before;
and do not press your hand over the entire cauterization, and let the patient be lying on his back;
and another manner of cauterization is that you heat the double-pronged cautery, as we have shown in the case of shoulder dislocation;
and lift the skin that is above the vein, or let the patient's hand come towards the left, and let the elevation of the skin be according to the size of the body, and the cauterizations should be according to the width of the body.
After that, he pushes in the two burning nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, and then draws them out through the cautery, and thus there will be four.
And if you see it, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
Après le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens,
Fire cautery is not suitable for a patient with dropsy, except in the manner known as "ascytis".
When you cure according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the navel, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the bladder, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the chest; And let the cautery be very close to the heart's tip.
After that, leave the cautery open to release pus for a long time, and do not neglect the patient's care after the cautery; And healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be like the one we previously showed; And the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as shown before.
When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of yellowish water, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; And lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply, so as to draw out the watery fluid, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Then do two cauteries on each leg at the little-toe joint; And the longer cautery should be one under the knee in front and the other behind it, in the middle of the leg;
And leave the burns open for a long time without treating them, until they heal on their own.
after the treatment of other treatments that we have mentioned.
When intestinal problems come from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated by conventional means; and you see the patient suffering greatly and has strong virtue, then make a large burn on the stomach according to what has been said before in the section on stomach burns, in the circular burn. and four subtle burns around the navel, at each one-sixteenth of an inch, and two burns on the hips.
And if you see that the moisture is abundant and the patient enduring, then make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each eye, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and they are old and from thick, cold, and moist corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have said by division, but it does not help, then perform cautery: Three on the spine of the back, placed one after another in a triangle, and one cautery below the anus, two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cold, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face make one large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the bladder with all the cauteries closed. And leave the cautery open for a long time. Aprés cure, wait until the place is healed.
When you cut a furuncle, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it all ablaze on the furuncle that has been cut. And leave your hand there until the cautery comes to the base of the vein from which the blood flows;
Do this once or twice, and if there is much furuncle, then cauterize each one as we have said. After the curing of the furuncles is beneficial until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on furuncle, it will have greater help.
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nous raconterons en son leu, si vient tel maladie que ne puet estre sanee fors que par cautere.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tout une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tout la tente combien elle a de parfont.
After heating the cautery that resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity in which the tent is inserted, and start again with the cautery until that rotten and corrupted flesh is burnt, once, or twice, or three times, according to how much is needed;
And guard against stretching the nerves within, and from large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, guard against these places, and do not perform this procedure except on flesh, and know that it is not persistent;
after curing the place until it is healed, and if the place is healed, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed;
and if the matter is not removed, know that the place is torn, and the bone corrupts at the base. and similarly as one of those which we will say in its place.
When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and from great flatulence, and a woman does not desire intercourse, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys from one side and another with the cautery we have previously mentioned. 
And if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater assistance.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a cautery on the part above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as a thumb's length;
And make one cautery on the back, or two if you need to;
and let the cautery be cleaved according to the shape mentioned before.
When the womb is cold and moist, preventing conception, and the menstrual flow is corrupt and delayed; And when they come, there is great pain: Then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the shoulder, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations on the back;
And let the cautery be made carefully, as we have said.
When the mucus descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
and the place of separation is found, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the hip joint with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle;
And so let the cautery be such as that which has been used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available, make three cauteries from a large olive, and let the cautery be as deep as all the fingers.
and heal it until it is healed.
de la douleur de la hanche When pain comes to the hip joint due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, but the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of thick humors with stinking pills, or other good similar pills. After that, make a cautery;
and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: This is to know together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is done in many ways, one of which is as follows:
that you cauterize on the hipbone three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make them deep and large, and let there be between each cautery a space the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-sized;
sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hipbone, for which there are four according to this shape:
And if you see it, then cauterize with the circle cautery that we have previously mentioned for the hip dislocation.
but do it in such a way that the circle includes the entire hip, and all the bone's surface is burned.
And this is the manner in which one proceeds with sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers' width, on the left side a little.
And let the cautery be cupped, and let the thickness of the scar be burned;
And if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers from the foot or close to it, make three or four cauteries where he feels the pain in the cautery which is called "finger". And if necessary, do more of them.
And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a cupped or circular cautery, and take care in all your cauteries not to leave such a large scar that you burn the nerves and major arteries, so as not to cause greater harm and constriction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and the entire foot became perforated and corrupt. After a belly ache from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, this is the manner: make such an iron and let it be at the end as thick as a penny, or a little less, and let it be between the teeth and from one tooth to the other, the length should be the size of a hazelnut.
And let the teeth be set in two parts, and also like nuts, and there should be a good handle of iron.
And this is the form:
And it should be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then put it on the hip of the sick person, and turn it on the healthy side.
And after cauterizing once, cauterize again, and leave it for three days. And then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it;
And yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can be tolerated where it is needed.
The cautery of burning medicine is such that you should make an instrument with teeth in which the margin of the door descends, and it should be made of bronze or iron, one side long, and in the height there should be two noses, and between each should be the width of a finger. etti de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; And let them be open from within and without, and join together according to this form:
Then place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and then press your hand very much on the box of the hip; Then put between the two circles of hot iron that have been heated in the fire, and leave it there for an hour, allowing the patient to bear the heat and burn of it.
For it works as if by fire;
and when the burning sensation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip from the soft iron, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until that which is blackened by the burn is removed; And let it remain for three days until the pus exits.
And this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds, until he is healed.
And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make one instrument that will fit according to what you have done in the hip equally;
and this is the way of the hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take quicklime and live coal, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot. where there should be one small hole outside so that the point of a razor can enter;
where there should be one small hole outside so that the point of a razor can enter; and place on top of that pot another well-lidded pot, and put alkaline and hot and sweet water on top, until there are two fingers' worth of liquid above the powders, so that you have it well in your hand.
and let it sit until it descends with water and dregs into the pot, then take all that water, and throw it onto hot coals and lime as before.
And then it will be very useful and is administered in many medical works and in the cauterization of other limbs.
For it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can well cauterize the hip thus as sesame and honey from anacardium and hot coals with soap, all these things mixed together.
And Galen tells us of a treatment by which a man was healed from the pain in his hip and the sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other treatment was done, and that he was cured after one treatment, and then he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
And it is said in such a way that you take fresh and dry green vitriol and grind it very finely with a little fat, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and let it sit;
And he lets it [be] for three hours, and by that amount that the patient no longer feels the burning.
And then have him enter the bath so that his body becomes slightly warm, and put him to bed, and all the pain will leave, and he will be healed.
And know that no one should use such a cautery, except after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheep's wool, it helps greatly.
and the cautery should be done in such a manner. Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the depression that is between the big toe of the foot and the other one called phalanx.
Afterwards, take dry sheep's wool and put it to the fire until it becomes coal, and place it on the fleece, and let it stay until it is stained.
And do so again, and do not cease to do so until you feel by sense that it reaches the hip, and that the pain is relieved.
and this manner of cautery is called "sheep's wool cautery".
de la dolor dou dos
Of back pain, whether it comes from falling, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, or from something like cold spread matter, none of these is suitable for cautery, except that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary that, after the patient has been purged with foul-smelling pills or other similar things, three lines of incisions are made on the back where the pain is located, each line being nine inches long, and in each line five cauteries or more, according to the strength and quantity that the patient can bear.
And let the cautery be made according to the method called "point";
And if you wish, make three or four cauteries in a medium-sized "clavicle" cautery in this manner.
This illness often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow forehead when they wake up, and fear. And you will find at the back of the spine, and with us, the appearance that comes over the other vertebrae.
When you see this, and you want to cure it, then cauterize it with the cautery of that type according to this form. So that the cautery burns each part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, beware that you do not administer cautery in a nervous area.
Of joint pain
When pain in the joints is from moisture that has spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which doctors call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures by medicines cannot heal it, it is healed by cautery in this manner:
make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-sized according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you make an incision on the sole of the foot, then make a cautery over the entire area called "punctum". And if the pains reach up to the knees and other joints, as often happens, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, in total three or four olive-sized cauteries on each side;
and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand outside for longer than it takes to burn the length of the heart.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pain is in the hands, then make two incisions around the wrist.
and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then make an incision above each joint and on the back of the hand.
and if the pain reaches up to the ribs or the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give them medicine.
For if you give him good care and purge the phlegm, he will be healed with God's help.
When diarrhea comes suddenly and the bowels descend to the kidneys and this is recent, then it should be that when you see him being treated, he should not eat anything that day. And that he uses things which loosen the belly, so that the excrement descends from his belly;
after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm until the bubbles are healed, and bring them to your fingers, and sign from underneath the flesh onto the bone of the wrist, and all in one sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
then heat the cautery which has this form:
Till he is white and has his hair cut off. Then reset the bubbles in their place; and the minister should hold his hand until they do not return again.
and work well on the thighs of the patient, and place a pillow and a sheet under the thighs, and another one on the foot which holds his hands.
Then place the cautery on the sign as long as your hand can reach, and hold it straight and steady until you touch the bone. And if you do not reach the bone on the first try, then repeat it again until you reach the bone. And be careful that the boiling does not overflow when you apply the cautery. So that you do not burn yourself. And so that by this the patient is not burned or any other harm comes to him.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and also large enough for adults according to their size.
After three days, cure the place of the burn with butter until the scalding is gone.
After the treatment of other wounds until they are healed, and the patient lies on his back for forty days until the wound is well closed.
And it is necessary that his nursing be done for a long time, so that the blisters do not burst when he tries to get up and walk around.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let him be given a well-made brace and wear it for another forty days.
And let him have good rest, that he works little and guards against overindulgence in drinking and eating, and against too much laughter.
And when he follows this advice, then he is completely healed.
And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When ulcers appear in other places and are painful, and you see that they no longer grow, do one cautery after another according to its size, and burn the third part of the heart. According to what we have said;
and any of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-pronged cautery like this:
but first mark the place of entry and make a line across the width above the opening, and another one below it, and then keep your hand steady throughout the entire cauterization.
But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, from falling or striking, and this pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and let the cautery be according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its strength and location of twisting and its pain.
if it is healed from the first cautery, it is good;
if this is not the case, repeat another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it must move to the nearby member; therefore, you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The humors are sometimes aided by cautery with great help, and likewise the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cannot you see it being cauterized? Take care if the disease is at its beginning; and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither diminishes nor stays, and you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: I enter the head at the nape, and the other towards the forehead at the hairline. And two on the two horns, and one behind on the occiput.
And leave your hand in such a way that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much that scabs come out of it so that the fumes of the gross humors can exit from there.
And cauterize on the nose according to what is in front.
And if the mixture is spread all over; and it clearly spreads, then you must cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, one cautery on the nose, two on the spine of the neck, six on the spine of the back, one large on the buttock and another nearby, and two on each shoulder. And two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
And beware of the nerves that are beneath the heel, lest you burn them.
And sometimes someone performs cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one on the stomach bone, and another on the liver.
And know that when you do more cauterizations, the more help you give, and the more it benefits him.
And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as the healthy person feels it, because his body is already completely corrupt.
And it is necessary that the cautery be great or small according to the members and the joints, as you will find them in various shapes of irons.
Afterwards, care for the place with flour made from vetches mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it does not heal, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size and smallness.
And let the cautery be a little deep into the thickness of the heart. then continue with the treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes one does cautery both on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed.
nevertheless let no one interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed and medical treatments are of no use, then cauterize it with a cautery a little deep, according to the thickness of the heart, so that the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
Then take flour of vetch and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of a pigeon and blood of an almond, each one part; And let it all be mixed together, and bound with a cloth, and placed in the spot until it heals.
The cure of cancer by cautery
When cancer begins at the start, and you see it stop, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the circumference of the cancer.
Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
nevertheless this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupt, and I have seen it happen sometimes.
and a more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around it, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes too long to die because of the excess or the old age of the patient when he is feeble (that is, too old) and has little blood, or because of the time; and you want to hasten his death: then cauterize him with many small cauteries by pricking. after that, leave him thus. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see her pierce through the entire cautery, then heat the cautery with this form:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease that is called «adubelati» until the cautery has pierced through to the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it outside in such a way that the course of the corruption is relieved.
After the treatment until he is perfectly cured.
There is another type of disease called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consumption of the limbs, for it consumes the limbs as fire does dry logs.
If you see this disease in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries very hot and large, according to what is needed for the place where the disease is;
afterwards, cauterize all around until you burn away all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupt is removed.
And then leave it for III days, and place on the cauterized places soft bread with oil until the burns of the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the cure of injuries producing flesh.
And if you see after three days that a scar does not form, it is good;
and if not, then begin the cautery again on the place where the flesh has become corrupt.
And this disease has sometimes been cured with cold medicine instead of fire cautery;
but nevertheless fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already spoken about the treatment with cold medicine in the division. take what you need.
of parsley that grows at the feet Often it happens that on the soles of the feet grows a disease called "closed" according to our intention, and it is a large warty thing that wounds the foot.
And the cautery for this disease is in two ways. That is to say, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Fire cautery is that you heat one cautery as if it were a feather of an owl, and let it be made of good iron so that it can hold the nail on all sides, and that there are subtle edges;
after placing it all hot on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to exude pus; then make an emplaster of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the emplaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Then heal the place of burning by applying a plaster until it is healed.
And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery. and it is done in this manner: take a reed of bronze or iron, or a quill of goose feather, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, on the pustules and warts. And place the chain above so that it presses all around, then put a pouch of hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and let the hot water find its way deeply to the root;
And let the patient endure the scalding of the hot water for an hour; Then leave it thus, and it will completely remove all its roots.
In this manner, do one after another, until you have treated all those that are in the body, then heal the burns that produce flesh.
When someone trembles from cold of the nerves or from quartan fever or others, it is necessary that you make four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; And in the cautery of the foot, and above the stomach at the umbilical cautery;
it will cause shivering, and will hasten the health from the cold disease.
Sometimes appear on the outside of the body, as stinking pustules, which come from large corrupted matters.
if it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery above each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of boxwood, of which the tip is gripped in the fire, or of long root of Aristolochia, or the lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow from then on, but the excess which comes from them is destroyed, and they are healed;
but this must be done after the evacuation of blood.
Often there is a great flow of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very serious matter to stop it.
And yet when this happens to someone, then hasten to put your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the blood is still under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore;
then heat several small and large olive-shaped cauteries in the fire until they are all red.
Then take I, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery until the blood is stopped.
And if it spurts when you lift your finger from the vein and the iron is extinguished, then take another hastily from those that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stopped;
and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient;
and know that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot stop it well, even if the artery is large, except by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines placed on that have the power to stop blood; And let it be tied and bound securely.
Whoever will administer clotting by tightly binding with cloths or by placing burning objects on top, or other similar things, it will not benefit if possible.
And if this happens to someone and he does not have a mirror or medicine nearby, then he should put his finger on the vein's wound as we have said, and stretch it well until it is sealed above the wound and above the vein; And do not move the finger, but pour cold water over it often until it is very cold, so that the blood is frozen and swollen and sealed;
and then make inquiries ahead for those who need cautery and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to use fire or burning medicine, and the instruments and causes and shapes of cauteries;
And I have placed this chapter from the head to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same path so that one finds more easily what one wishes.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for treatment. if they are of such a nature that they become so distressed with their illness that they die easily due to the insanity they experience from their illness, and the severity of their affliction; And one must have fear of these.
And there are those who give you their mind, and say: “wait, I am cured”; and the disease is stubborn.
It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater consideration on your honor than on your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely concerning those of whom you are certain, and from whom you can take and gain.
and use prognosis and diagnosis in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored;
and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and praiseworthy memory.
Very dear son, may our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter for you by sections, in the same way as in the previous chapter on cautery, which I have described to you from the head to the feet, so that you may find more easily what you need.
You should know that this illness often comes to children at birth, when the midwife pulls too hard on the child's head.
And sometimes it happens for unknown reasons, so we do not know.
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and all those whom I have seen were hurried to death. And therefore it seems to me that I should leave the treatment of such cases.
And I saw an infant whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day so that it could not support itself.
And the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone on the forehead, between the brain and the bone.
And the procedure is such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a wide incision in the head.
And it should be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out.
And see here the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, like this:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the seams of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out strongly when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return to its place: then you must make three incisions in the head like this:
And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. After closing the incisions with bandages and powder, apply wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day.
Then dislocate it, and heal the wound with compresses and dressings, and allow the head to be steadily held, and give the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way to incise is that you look at where the pus of the abscess appears, and the gathering of water;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; 914 sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and the gathering of water, and make an incision according to your ability;
and be careful not to cut the artery; And let there be a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
When someone has a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or the bladder, and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is to use cautery by cutting the two arteries.
Therefore, when you see them open, the patient must turn his head backward; then rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, and then let the patient stretch his neck with all his might against the cloth. Then look for the vein where the blood beats, and the place of one is behind the ears and is not far away.
Then mark the places on each side, then open one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, so that the incision reaches to the bone, and let this be wide at the top.
And if you see, insert the spatula underneath the artery and cut above it, cutting also as two must cross each other.
And when the vein is cut, then the blood jumps up continuously outward.
And if the surgeon does not open to the touch, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then sign the cross and cut down to the bone;
and it is necessary to let out blood outside, and this should be six parts, or perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the fullness of the artery;
then examine the wound: if there remains a point on the bone of pus, then cut away so that such abscesses do not form, then apply pressure to the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Of headache When a chronic headache comes and an acute catarrh due to the moisture of tears, heat in the temples, and old insanity, and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine, and none of this helps him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes his hair grow long on his temples, and he attends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and it protrudes little outside except in some men who are too cold;
And if it is swollen, let the patient strain his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and wash the area with hot water until the blood vessel appears clearly. Then take the spatula of which there is the form: Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up with tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath each part.
And if the artery is subtle, then turn it with the point of the hook, and cut that part according to the quantity of two fingers' width. For if it is not cut, then the blood will not flow at all.
And draw out blood for six times, up to three.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread to prevent decay before healing the wound, and let the blood flow out gradually.
Then cut the excess that is between the two ligaments at that same hour, and then, if you see, use the cautery blade to cauterize down to the bone until the head is cut.
And this is the mild work, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm temperament. For the cautery is used to remove moisture: because it is of greater help against moisture.
In order to extract the artery, one must fill the place with old cotton and put a well-made compress on top.
And when they are unwrapped, they should be treated with dry medicines that promote the growth of flesh, and with compresses, until they are healed.
And if without the cutting of an artery as long as you work there, then hasten with the copper through cautery, where you apply the vitriol and hold it in your hand until the blood is stanched. And if you do not have this [vitriol] present, then place your finger on the spot until the blood is frozen, and wash the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it as needed.
And there should be one finger's width of space between the two knives, and then when you have brought the two irons together, and placed the hot iron on top until it reaches the bone, cut the vein in two places. And let there be a space between the two heads, for it is not completely healed by this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is better and more suitable for the extraction of an artery that you cauterize the vein with this cutting cautery, in two parts, but let the cuts be well-spaced to retain their heat longer. When the instrument is too blunt, it retains less of its heat.
tears When tears from the eyes descend into the veins that are on the head of fire, and medical treatment does not help at all, and you see the patient's face turn red, and there is a sensation of cold in the forehead as if shivering; And if the eyes are dark and moist to the point that the hair of the eyelids falls out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is necessary. And the ancients called it "treatment for contusions", and it is that you make behind the patient who has this disease, the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make three cuts in the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "treatment for contusions", and it is that you make behind the patient who has this disease, the hairs that he has on his forehead, then make three cuts in the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; And let one of the incisions be like two fingers' width in the middle of the forehead, descending down to the nose, and the other two on either side of the ribs above the nipples, and be careful not to cut into the arteries that are on the sides above the nipples.
And keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be three fingers' width across.
And have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping the blood, then apply the sharp instrument from two sides like this form:
From the incision that is in front of the temple to the second incision; And peel off all the skin that is between the two incisions along with the fat that is on top of the bone, then do likewise from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove this instrument forcefully. Place in the first cut the instrument that is called "scalpel," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other; this is its form.
And place the sharp side towards the flesh of the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle cut.
And cut all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches the heart, and then make another cut in the middle slit up to the other side.
And then bleed equally, and press the place for the blood taken out.
Then put in each slit a tent of old cotton, and place on it moistened cloths with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no abscess comes there.
And on the third day untie the bandage, and apply a large amount of warm water, then perform the dressing with a basilicum ointment mixed with rose oil, and other dressings used for wounds, until it is healed.
When people commonly come down with an acute catarrh, and you see the eyes dim and small, and the sight weakened, and the lids burnt and the hair falls out, and there is sharp pain in the head, and the patient sneezes; then know by these signs that this condition and this catarrh come from many veins, and the remedy for it is as follows:
And do this: instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another one from ear to ear. And begin with an incision from the left temple to the right, extending to the bone. and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that control eating.
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then dry between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen bandages there. Then lay over it moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess.
When it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow there, then treat it with drying agents that cause the flesh to heal.
In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of resin, and make a poultice with them. And apply it to these wounds in order to heal the flesh completely.
Of ear stoppage
Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: Or seeds, or a creature, or a stone from a mine, or similar things such as iron. Or seed, like peas, beans; If something is flowing out like water, and similarly things.
Quand quelque chose comme une pierre ou une autre chose qui n'est pas appropriée pour l'oreille tombe dans l'oreille et ne pousse pas à l'intérieur de l'oreille, alors exposez l'oreille au soleil.
If you see the stone, if any little drop of violet oil or sesame oil drips from it, then initiate extraction. and make him sneeze with condiments, and plug his nostrils when he is about to sneeze, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool. And stretch the ear outwards.
Often there comes pus through this treatment;
and if it does not come out, then initiate extraction with fine tweezers, of which the shape is described here:
If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good;
if not, then initiate extraction with a fine probe of small diameter; iento 12.
And if it does not drain through the ear, make a tube of bronze and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole firmly. And stop up the ear around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the tube; then draw strongly, for often a strong force comes as we have said;
and if it does not come strongly in this manner, then take some birdlime and put it into some pointed instrument, and put a little cotton around it. then press the birdlime onto the stone or whatever it may be, and draw strongly.
And if it does not drain strongly from any of these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear before a hot abscess and spasm come there.
And the manner of the cut is such that you should first cauterize the patient with the cephalic, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue. Then make the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fatty place or dependent area; And let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can, and suck it quickly to your mouth.
And tend to it until it is healed.
And if there are seeds inside and they swell, then administer an extraction.
And if it cannot come out, then apply a thin subtle poultice according to this form: and make an incision of that grain.
But do not do this when you think that the grain is wet due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces.
then extract it with fine tweezers and place it in a press, as we have said, so that the extraction may be delicate.
In the case where water falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient first uses sneezing-inducing substances, and fills the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on his side, on the same ear where the water has entered. If it jumps out due to this, it is good.
if not, then take several stones according to the length of your thumb, light and soft, and heat them a little in the fire; and place one of them into the opening of the patient's ear, and make him sit on his feet from another side, and strike with another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this until all the water has come out, and so it will all come out.
And if you see, take a reed, and put one of the heads in the ear, and hold the other head with fire until the longer part of the reed is burned.
then repeat with another reed until all the water has come out, as we have said regarding stones.
In extracting an insect, if it is of small body, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division;
but if it is of large body that can be felt, then perform an extraction with tweezers; and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
In extracting worms infested in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight: If there are any openings, draw them out with fine forceps. If none are found, take the cane whose form is here:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the intensity of the patient's suffering, then draw out all the cane. Do this often until all the worms come out.
And if they do not obey and come out, then stop up around the cane with cotton as I have said in the stone.
And if they do not come out strongly as we have said, then administer the distillations that the ancients have proved in the killing of worms, and you will find them in treating distillations.
And thus drip your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, whose form you see here. And whether it is made of silver or brass, it should have one small hole at the bottom and an opening on top for dripping.
And to press in the distillation, use an iron instrument well-suited for this purpose. If you wish, take a razor and wrap around its point some cotton suitable for this task; then cast your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish, into the funnel, with the funnel in the ear.
then insert the razor with all the cotton into it and press your hand gently until the oil is completely dripped into the ear. And let the patient feel warmth inside, and let the distillation be in a pot heated over the fire before it is distilled into the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as good.
Of ear stoppage
No child is born without a hole in their ear;
and the same thing happens to adults due to clogging of a wound or flesh born inside the ear, and this clogging sometimes goes deep into the ear, so that it cannot be seen;
and sometimes it happens that the pot is empty of the hole, which one can see well.
Therefore, those that go deep and cannot be seen are of serious illness in many ways, and as for the ones that can be seen, it is necessary that you put the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside if you see the depilation obvious, then work all this spatula of which is the form here
And let it be sharp and cutting both front and back completely, so that it does not wound the ear;
if the depilation is of flesh born or of the body of the ear, then hold it with subtle tongs, and cut gently, so that all that flesh may be removed.
And if the incision is deep in the ear, take a fine, light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the body of the ear.
If you feel the depilation from which the patient feels itching at hearing, prick gently, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear
then put in the ear a plug according to the width of the hole, and wet it with Egyptian oil. Do this every day until the wound is healed, or take a cloth and soak it in red wine, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it.
And if you see the ear swelling, then remove the cloth and use another cloth soaked in ointment made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone. Then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding, which are discussed in the section on distillations.
This ail that comes in paper on the eyes when they are wet and then dry, you should remove them with tweezers and scissors, and cut off their root with a small spoon. Then put powdered vitriol on the spot.
And if it comes off, then cauterize with a fine lancet, and afterwards cauterize the incision well. embre li cauterizeir la place ou il fu remes.
And many times they return, when something remains of their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
et maintes fois repairent, Many times in the eyes there come things that seem like hailstones in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstone," and it is a collection of moisture thick in the eye both above and below. The operations are as follows:
The operations are as follows: Take care if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and this is easy to know;
Then make an incision on the surface, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with tweezers and cut it off.
If you cannot cover it without piercing the skin slightly, it will not harm the patient.
And if the split is large, sew it up with a stitch and treat until it heals;
And if it is small, do not use any force, for the unguent will restore it quickly and generate flesh.
And if the stone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the skin, and stretch the stone with tweezers, and cover and press on one side and then the other;
And if the skin is separated by the incision, it does not matter.
And when the stone is covered, remove the eye of salted water, and treat the place with that which generates flesh until the patient heals.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a grease that forms on the skin of infants more than in adults, and it greatly troubles their eyes. In the mornings, they develop catarrh, and cannot look at the sunlight because tears quickly form in their eyes;
And because of this, they lie on their faces and sleep with their eyelids closed, and the skin under their eyebrows is moistened by the swelling and appearance covered in exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press on the place with your fingers, you feel the bone move between them.
And the manner of working is for the patient to put his head into clean water.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then place it on him. And press with your thumbs on either side, so that the ends of the bones come together in a circle.
Then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a cut not more than half an inch wide, like the one made when bleeding a vein.
And cut the skin through until you reach the bone. And in many cases, bone fragments come out of the cut, resembling a piece of white fat.
Then extract it all in one piece with a cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered.
And be careful not to push into the cut, so that you do not reach all the way with the spatula to the bone, and injure it.
And if the vein does not open at the beginning of the cut, then slightly widen the cut until it opens.
Then extract it as we have said, then wet rags in vinegar and water, and place on the spot, and bind with bandages.
And there are such men who break stones and place them to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
of the hairs of the papers When hairs grow on the eyelids other than the natural ones and become mature, they harm the eyes and bring about various diseases such as frequent tearing and softening of the eyelids and cataracts, to the point that it leads to the loss of sight;
And the treatment is according to four methods: Either by fire cautery, or by medicinal water according to what is said in the previous chapter on cauterization, and it can also be done by incision and suture, or by hooks, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
if it is torn, that is good; if not, then insert a needle with all the thread on top; and let it be at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow near those hairs, and draw the thread over all the paper, and turn it to the razor;
then make an incision in the part under the paper, under the hairs, touching the whole spatula, from the large tear duct to the small one;
then remove the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then sign on the paper the shape of a hook, like a myrtle leaf, and nevertheless it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity that you wish to raise the paper which is divided into all.
And for such a person who needs it, one should cut a large quantity of the paper according to how the paper is softened.
Then make the entire sputum into two lines that you have drawn, and begin from the large cheekbone down to the small one. And let one of the cracks be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the ointment into one of the two corners of the heart, then peel it all off.
Then assemble the two lips with a seam of one needle along one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the excess of the threads on the two eyebrows adhere to each other with some sticky substance, if you know how to do this.
And if not, then do not worry about it; leave the stitching and threads for III days or IV.
Then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, for the skin recovers by the closing of the wound and the coming together of it, but stitching is harmful (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear. And there is another method:
And there is another method: It is that you trace the skin with a design that resembles the leaves of myrtle, as we have described, in three places that are exposed according to the form that follows:
Then cut those who rise to small equal forces according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread in it, and insert it into the design; And insert another thread next to the large tear, and the second thread next to the small one, and gather the threads evenly between your fingers.
Then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the leather over which you have placed a patch, as we have said, then gather the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is healthy.
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar comforting ointments.
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the skin is turned:
then you must use what we have said about the incision.
But stitching in one place and another is more skillful.
The treatment of dogs is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper into a cone and place it inside as I have said, then make two dogs by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula is; and cut off the two ends where you hold the threads;
then assemble one to the other delicately on top of the paper around the eye, and hold the two dogs firmly from both sides; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is held will die and become black and rotten, until it falls off by itself.
If it delays, then cut it with scissors, then treat it until it is healed;
And when the wound has healed, and the scab has fallen off, and the hairs will no longer hurt.
And this is the shape of the two cannulas that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity in length and width:
The work is such that you take a fine needle, and you put a thread of soft and fine silk through it. Then assemble the heads and tie them together finely, and let the length of the thread be one palm long.
Then arrange in the quiver another fine silk thread quickly, and tie the ends of the thread together.
Then let the patient put his head on your shoulder;
And it should be in the sunlight so that the work is visible, for this is a fine and small work. Then put the needle all the way into the quiver at the root of the hair, and make it pierce the skin quickly until you draw it out over the natural hair.
Then pull out the hair until it reaches the base, and push into the base that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then pull out your hand so that the hair comes out completely from the base to the skin with the natural hair.
And if the base is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then you will pull the base from below along the entire thread that you have ordered, until the base comes out of the hole above and you can see it with the eye's vision;
then you will pull out the base and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two days or three, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows back;
And if the hair is small, then take a long hair from the horse's mane, and raise it with that one you leave, until it is lengthened, and then lift it.
of the eye's decay When this disease called "alecrati" or the purulence comes in the eye, there are two types of it.
one is natural, and the other unnatural.
And it occurs suddenly from a wound, or from cutting or burning, and by similar things.
And the way to work on it is that you cut through that adhesion, and sever its lips, and put inside linen tenths, and leave it until it heals.
And it is not appropriate to use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict. For if you do this, then the disease returns worse than before;
but in the work of softening things, such as fenugreek; and the root of water lily or flax seed should be cooked, and diachylon melted in some of the oils, and wrap it in a bandage, and treat this.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal according to the shape it was before;
and this work that we have spoken of is not outside of remedies for this illness, so that it does not return according to the shape it was before.
Cette maladie, qui est en dessous, s'appelle véritablement «axacrati», et elle est à la fois naturelle et accidentelle.
The accident comes from a wound and a tear and a burn and similar things;
and the way of working it is that you take a needle with two threads attached, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left side to the right, so that the thread comes out in two places on the flesh.
Then press the flesh above all the needle, and cut it to a broad spatula shape. And if the appearance of the stone returns as it should be, this is good;
if not, then take a razor and place it in the cleft, and turn the stone, and make two clefts on the side inside the stone;
and let the ends of the two clefts be at the two corners of the incision that you have cut, and let them be made in such a way that when they are assembled, the appearance is like the shape of a letter called "Greek";
then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are sharp underneath, following the stone, then join the two freed parts, and sew them together with a woolen thread;
Then, regarding the treatment of those we have spoken about concerning softening medicines and tents, until they are healed.
And if the disease comes from a laceration or incision or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a clean incision under the hairs of the skin, according to what has been said before; then drain between the two lips of an ulcer, as I have said.
then drain between the two lips of an ulcer, as I have said. and the work should be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an engine with all his power to bring back the shape to its natural form.
and the patient himself, according to what is necessary in terms of treatment and instruments, in various situations.
When this healing occurs in such a way that the skin above is adhered to the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor underneath the skin, and lift it up;
and use tweezers to hold it, until you cut that which is exposed to the fine spatula, which should not be too sharp or too cutting, so that the patient cannot tolerate the spatula being too sharp and damaging the eye;
and let your cut, with which you peel off that adhesion, be light, so that the skin returns to its natural shape;
and all that adhesion is healed, and sometimes there is salty water in the eye, and it is lifted with fresh water, and with chamomile;
Then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye abundant wool soaked in egg. And after the third day, use collyrium and suturing instruments until he is healed.
Know that the nail grows in two ways: one is nervous and similar to hard silk, and the other which is not nervous but is like white frozen moisture, that when touched with iron and tried to clip with tweezers, no one can.
And both likenesses begin towards the large tear duct and grow little by little until they cover the entire eye and all its light and movement.
And the manner of incision is such that the patient places his head on your shoulder, then closes his eyes; and holds the paper in your hand, then winds the fingernail around small pincers, and stretches it upwards; then takes a needle, and inserts into it the hair of a horse, or cow, or ox, and makes the thread strong; and slightly doubles the tip of the needle and pierces it into the nail, and pushes the needle all the way through, and binds the nail with a thread and stretches it upwards, and completely removes the skin along the side of the nail that follows the vein and the silk from the hair to the root, then cuts off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with all the subtle spatula and small forces, and leaves the natural flesh in the tear duct, so that through the incision does not come the body's usual tears;
And sometimes the nail stretches to the quick, and to the thread, as we have said. then scrape off all the soft tissue, of which this is the form:
And ensure that the soft tissue does not touch the flesh and break it, and that the tendon is not torn;
and after the incision, put in the eye a little of burned silk, and made from lead oxide, and leave it until the next day; then treat him so that he is healed.
And if the nail is not prominent and you cannot insert the needle, and the quick cannot enter, often this appearance of a nail is cured with medicines;
and they are born as I have described in the section on childbirth. And if you see that it has been covered, then work on the eye of the patient, and take a small sharp spoon according to this form: and raise the eyelid gently. And if you see that it does not diminish and the reason presses on, then apply to the eye a collyrium made of lead and red chalk and sal ammoniac, ground together, and bandage the eye until the next day;
If there is nothing contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then let it be, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then begin again with the work as before, until it is healed.
then begin again with the other eye according to this same procedure, until it is completely removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid appears in the eye to a great extent, then suspend it with the onion, and cut off a part of it but not all, so that a body of tears does not come there;
Then drip into the eye an angry red liquid made from quicksilver.
In the eyes of some men there appears sometimes a red flesh, covering the pupil and extending onto the eyelids, turning them outward, and resembling a balsam apple.
and the procedure is such that the patient puts his head in your lap, then you work on the eyes, and collect all that flesh into suitable tweezers for this purpose, and hold it with force;
then cut off the first piece of flesh, and continue cutting until you have finished, being careful not to harm the eye during the procedure;
and let the cut of the spatula be such as we have said in the cutting of the nail and small nails from which one removes a splinter, as is shown in the form following this chapter;
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, then fill the opening with oil of celery seed where you drip red colocynth or similar corrosive medicines, and place over it a piece of cotton soaked in egg white, so that it is assured to be warm against an abscess;
and if anything remains there, and the pus begins to increase, and you suspect an abscess is forming, then leave the opening and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for a warm abscess;
then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when flesh is joined in the opening by this means.
But nevertheless you must moderate the treatment of each weak opening according to the natural way; And from the way of accident, in ironwork.
and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member can withstand the work.
If they are red veins that cover the eye, they hinder sight and weaken the eye every day.
Therefore, first you should look to see if the eye, into which the arrow has entered, is sound, and there is no other disease besides the arrow. then take the coal in this manner:
instruct the patient to place his head in your lap, then raise those veins as far back as possible according to his knowledge, and let the incision be subtle, double, like this shape: ️
Et soit deux fois onze degrés dans le corps, selon cette forme :
then, with the coal, incise those veins subtly and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see those veins moving out of the eye;
And take care not to wound the eye with the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not cut more than those veins.
And when you have done this, instill in the eye green and red choler to corrupt what remains of the scab.
And if you do not have the power to remove all of it in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of heat from an abscess, then begin again according to this manner which was before, until it is healed;
And this is the form of the strengths:
The healer calls "arissati" fistulae:
when you treat it by cautery and hot medicine as I have said before, and it does not heal, then there is pus in it that you must open above the abscess, where it should be removed, and drain all the moisture from there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then clean it with all the instruments whose form I have described here.
and it is called "sharp hook", and it should be made of iron, with a round head, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the following form:
And place on top of it the spot of the rotten bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is removed;
And do this several times, then restore the place with drying medications.
If the place is healed and flesh grows, and the body of the wound is healed, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not suppurating, and no evil incident occurs, know that it is healed.
If not, then there is no other trick than to bring the fistula back through the nasal passage in this manner: And it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take a drill in this manner, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be tapered to the end as you see here:
Then place it on the bone near the eye socket, then move your hand away from the eye into a pouch, then turn the whole forest until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it because the wind comes out if he holds his hand to his nose.
And then apply dry medicine to the place as I have shown you, and when the flesh grows and the place hardens, the matter goes to the nose. This is a lighter procedure for the patient.
When the eye is completely open and there is no obstruction or narrowing of the nose, you must bind the patient.
Then heal it, then apply cupping glasses to the temples without pricking to draw out [humors], then place on the eye a poultice made of alum and aloe and incense and frankincense, then press the eye, and bandage with strips of cloth.
And the manner of applying bandages is such that you take bandages soft enough, and fold each one into fourths, then place one on top of the other according to the amount the eye needs.
Then hold it in place with a very hard bandage, and resume using cupping glasses to suck without cutting;
Then remove the cupping glasses and keep the eye bound day and night, and if the ligature weakens, it is necessary to bind it tightly.
Then remove the bandage after a day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good;
If not; then resume applying poultices and bandages and the ligature and cupping glasses until it is healed.
of the breakage of a vein When discharging comes into the soft cloth, it opens, and comes out of the papers like a drop of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
Then if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle into the root of the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the eyelid; and let it pierce through, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement.
then cover the place of the double thread and wrap part of the soft cloth around it, and secure it well, then remove the needle and put a damp cloth soaked in plenty of egg on the eye.
And leave it there until the thread and the soft cloth fall off, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the wound is bound with a piece of cloth from each side of a circle until it heals.
And if the eye gives a great appearance of it, pierce it with a subtle surgical instrument through to the depth of the eye, and let out the cloudy moisture and descend the eye, and insert it immediately.
then keep it thus until it is healed.
This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing other than a bubble that forms in the eye, appearing like descending water, but it is not water;
and the manner of performing the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands on both sides, and move it until you see the bubble rise to your eyes; then it should be pierced through, and not descend, and let the light be extinguished, and may the patient see things as he did before;
and if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descending of the bow is not prepared as we have said.
then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and cut into the hard skin at the junction with the hard skin and the horn, until the bow comes out.
and when it has come out, then drip into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or hot water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
of the eye's waters We have knowledge of the similarities of waters in their division, and those which are necessary for piercing. Perform it according to health.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, out of the light from the sun, and tie the healthy eye shut tightly.
Then place the eyelid of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right.
Then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a ray on that white part of the eye at the minor lacrimal duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand until it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty place.
And it is necessary that the measure of the almagda route be at the depth of the measure from the plummet to the end of the nostril. And this is the crown of the eye.
Then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horny skin, and then place the instrument to where the water is, then press it under one vein after another.
If water enters now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting a little, and if the water rises up the second vein, place the finger with the instrument, and when it is stuck in and does not rise, then draw out the almagda gently turning your hand a little at a time.
And then put in a drop of pure oil, and lift this eye up. Then place outside the eye cotton or wet wool in rose oil and plenty of egg, and bind with a healthy eye.
We, and those who are of our time, apply comfrey with plenty of egg on top.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," of which here is the shape:
And pierce therefore only the membrane, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put there aloes, as we have said.
and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a warm sleeping place, where he sleeps on his back in a dark place.
and let him be free from all movements, and take light food, and not move his head to the right or left, and let him lie according to his condition until the third day.
then unbind him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and show him some things, and then rebind him until the seventh day.
and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate him, because the waters rise quickly.
If abscesses come, you should open the eye before the seventh day, and apply that which soothes abscesses.
And when it is healed, open the eye and place on its face a border to cover for some days, and always keep it in that dark house.
Then leave the house gradually, and turn back to his habits;
And know that no disciple should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from the Yirach, who told us that in their land they do almagda surgery, where water is sucked out, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients. And perhaps this is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that he who does not know them may see;
and they should be of pure copper. And their tops should be of this same subtlety, and the lower part in three sharp angles.
Sometimes there are born in them various shapes of snakes, so that some appear to have many legs like scorpions.
And if there are such [snakes], they may be charmed with the color of fire, and some have a gentle nature of good color. Therefore, for the snake that is gentle and not charmed, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
Therefore, for the snake that is gentle and not charmed, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the onion to those snakes, and drive them away. Pour extrêmement fines et aiguës, et ensuite soutiens la spatule
And if there remains anything that cannot be cut, then open it with very fine instruments lightly, so that nothing remains. And if the abscess swells or bursts before you have completed the operation, then support it as needed;
And if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize until the pus is dried up and all the flesh removed; then throw it into a well-sealed vessel filled with vinegar or wine. If the vessel works, and moisture reaches the mouth, know that he is cured;
And if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is flesh born on the bone above, which prevents the instrument from cutting.
Then you should place there a little thick linen thread, and tie it with your hand, and each knot should have between them a finger width or less. And the patient should put the head of the thread into his nose as strongly as he can, and pull it until it comes out through the mouth.
And often children do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it.
Then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other by feeling the thread as we have described.
Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then draw out the thread, wipe off the blood, and dip the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before.
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of flesh;
And then put in the nose some lead for a few days until it is healed, and if there is need for dry medications, then use them.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, in which one distills the oils and medications into the nose.
And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the passage also.
And if you see, make a closed reed, and let the instrument be full to cleanse the head.
And have a handle at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
Of the flesh above the nose
Often there arises in the head of the nose a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes very large, so much that it is a visible thing to behold.
And for this reason, you must cut it off at the beginning and remove all of its strength, then apply the cautery or burning medicine on top.
And if it is delayed in being cut until it is large, then take care if it is hard, of dark color, and poor sensation.
Do not touch it with iron, for it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts into it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient.
and if the abscess is of soft touch, not at all of red color, and you see that it can be completely covered, then let the patient bleed and the incision without fear, and treat the place with dry and restraining things.
Know that when a solution for continence comes to one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men.
It is necessary then, when this happens to someone, to see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips together in one stitch, then treat it until it is healed.
and if the lips are already separated on both sides, then it is necessary that you burn all their interior parts until they heal, then join the two lips together in one stitch, and bandage it, and powder with dragon's blood and ground incense. And place on top of the powders a piece of strong or other suture plaster, and let it remain until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of stitching is to bring the wound together: or with needles, as we have said in the case of the belly stitching; or with thread, as I have told you.
of the abscesses of the lips
In the hands of some men, there occurs within the lips a hard abscess, resembling barleycorns, smaller and larger;
then you must turn the lips, and cut into each knot, and take it with tweezers and cut it in each part;
then fill the place after the incision of vitriol with grease, so that the wound may be stained;
and then apply a plaster of linen, and dress the place with dry things until it is healed.
Often occurs on the gums joined flesh, which the ancients called "albulus";
so you should hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root, and let the wound bleed out.
then apply on the place vitriol ointment, or other restraining and drying powders;
and if that flesh returns after being cut, which often happens, then cut it the second time, and cauterize it: ︎ If it does not return after cautery;
Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough. And sometimes the teeth are black and yellowish and rotten, to the point where decay reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid.
then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and pull out the teeth or scabs until nothing remains. And thus do with blackness and greenness, and with jaundice and other stains, until they are cleaned.
And if one removes what is there at the first reason, it is good. If not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have everything reset.
And know that the teeth need various shapes of instruments for setting, according to what the work shows, because the file used for filing the teeth has different forms than those used between the teeth. And these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain, you delay drawing it out as long as possible, for this should not be done. hline Because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to draw it out.
Therefore, when the patient is forced to have the tooth pulled, you must be certain of the aching tooth. Often pain afflicts the patient, thinking it is a toothache, and he has the good tooth pulled. Yet the pain does not leave because of this, until the bad tooth is removed, for we have already seen this happen with these lords.
And when you are certain about the aching tooth, it is necessary that you cauterize all around the tooth as far as possible to protect the gum from all sides;
Then move it with your fingers or fine pliers, little by little, until it is well loosened, then secure the pliers firmly. And let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, if it does not come out forcefully, then take one of these instruments and push it gently into each side, and remove it as you did first.
And if the tooth is pierced and eaten away, then you must fill it with rags, where the holes are. and if you tighten it gently with pliers, so that it does not break when tightening;
and you must very skillfully work around the gum to remove the tooth.
And take great care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and the patient will suffer greater pain than before due to the evil of the root.
And take care not to act as the ignorant healers do, who in their haste and boldness sometimes break the tooth, and do not bring about what we have described.
but sometimes they cause great illness due to the roots that remain or because of the tooth they break, as we have often seen.
And when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt.
And if blood comes from it, as often happens, then fill the place with crushed vitriol.
And if this does not work, then cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments that one uses to pull teeth first should be with long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull out the tooth.
And these are the shapes: And they should be of thick iron that does not bend when pulling, and they should be well-made and toothed to hold well.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains after pulling out, it is necessary that you place moistened cotton in butter on the place for one or two days, until the place is softened, then insert the tweezers called "algefri", so that the tooth appears to be a bird's beak.
And let them be made inside like a file, and this is the shape.
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", that is, pincers, into it.
And let it be outside and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out from this, it is good.
If not, then help yourself with all the instruments which are used in the forms that follow hereafter.
And so one helps oneself with this instrument that has two teeth, of which here is the form: and other iron tools that are at the front in the manner of teeth, and with this instrument that looks like large pliers, whose form is here:
And let this instrument be outside so that it cannot break, and know that there are many instruments of teeth. and also other instruments, which are not counted.
and the wise master finds his instrument by himself according to what his work and the illness shows him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity and if one breaks the cartilage or other bones, where it can, then he seeks the instruments that are needed, which I have told you about, and helps with the actions, whose forms are here: ️
And let them be thick and firm to hold the bone, that it does not escape, but can be held and removed.
And then restore it with the appropriate medicine for this purpose. If there is decay in the bone and it is small, use all these tools.
When the teeth appear not according to nature, and the shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know if the tooth is new after a tooth, and is not in the right place, and one cannot file or grind it.
Then pull it out. And if it is caught with the tooth, then take this instrument whose shape is like a small beak and is made of iron at the point.
And the instrument cuts little by little each day because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it appears that it can be filed down, then file it with a file like this shape:
and it is like the file with which one makes needles;
and with a file the tooth is removed bit by bit each day lightly, so that it does not move until it falls out.
then the plain at the end to any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, it is necessary to file away the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth are loose, whether by striking or falling out, and the patient cannot chew on what he eats without them falling out, and you have treated them with astringent medicine, and it does not work;
then they must be secured with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes.
And let the thread be of medium thickness, not too thick or too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
And if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then pass the ends between the misaligned teeth, whether there is one or more, until you skillfully reach the other healthy tooth. Then repeat the covering from the starting point, and gently and skillfully tighten your hand until it does not move at all.
And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the ends of the thread with scissors, and gather them together, and place them between the healthy teeth, so that they do not injure the tongue.
And then he leaves it so tight for as long as it can stay in place, and if it dislocates again or the string breaks, then he binds it with another string;
so that it stays in place and serves him thus for his entire life, and this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see:
And when a tooth falls out, it should be put back in its place, from time to time, as we have said.
and let no one who is not wise and skillful interfere with it, and sometimes a tooth made from cow bone is shaped, and placed where the defect is, and bound as we have said, and stays and serves thus for a long time.
Sometimes there is this ligament which comes under the tongue at birth. or by accident of a healed wound;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your lap, and raise their tongue;
then cut the nervous ligament wide, so that the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or a knot, and this is due to the suddenness of the wound, then push in the hook and cut widely that ligament;
and be careful that the cleft is not too deep, because of the artery which is underneath;
and when you have done this, lift the place with rose water and aloes, or cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen;
And the patient should shave every night, so that the place cannot scab over.
And if a bleeding comes out, put ground vitriol on the place; and if the blood spreads, then cauterize it with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this. then treat it again until it is healed,
and if you see it turning black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
and if it is inclined to become white, with moisture present, throw in alum, and open it with a fine spatula, and clean it from both sides. And if blood rises during your work, apply vitriol until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you remove all the foreign body.
Then lift it up with oil and silk, and care for other treatments until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the throat Sometimes there are lumps in the throat called "gland," and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you treat them, as we have said in the description, and they are not healed, take care:
If it is a hard abscess of small size and pale color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding; but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will separate it from there, lest it burst on its own;
and if it is of white color again, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument for cutting, but first look whether the hot abscess rests and is appeased.
Then have the patient sit before the sun, and his hands be in your hand, and he open his mouth wide and you take the tongue between your hands, and press the tongue down onto the instrument entirely, which is its form;
and let it be of silver or fine brass, like a knife:
When you press the tongue against this instrument and see the abscess, take the onion and fix it in the almond paste, and draw it forcefully over the top as much as you can;
And draw out some object from the cloth with it, then cut off the instrument, whose shape seems like a forceps. And yet the heads are curved, and one against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take the tongs, of which here is the shape: And let it be cutting on one side, and named on the other side.
And when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and afterwards gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and salted water, and if blood begins to flow, then gargle the patient with water, in which cooked pomegranate rind or myrtle leaves, and similar things are mixed, until the flow is stopped. Then let the cure continue until he is cured;
and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almond-shaped ones, so cut them off in the same way as the two almond-shaped ones.
And I treated a woman for an abscess that was born within her throat, that is to say, one small abscess;
and had almost completely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passage, nor could she eat or drink, and would have died if she remained in this state for one day or two.
And the abscess was so high that it had forced out two teeth through the two openings of the nose.
I hurried immediately and inserted one lancet, then drew it out, and with it pulled out a large portion of pus;
then reattach another part in the other hole of the nose, and he opened his mouth and pressed his tongue;
then inserted a lance into these abscesses, and took out some of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the woman's throat passage was opened up, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time;
and the abscess would always grow back and fill up the place that I had emptied, until it became very large again;
then I cauterized it from within the throat; thus it remained without growing;
And let this body be separated from these parts, and let it be as God made it after me.
of the eye
When the pupil descends to the eyelid and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular";
And if it is below, large and round, it is called "eye".
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that this abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then you must cauterize it.
And the one which is round and assembled and is not long; And it is either bloody or of a dark color or black, then you should avoid incising it. For there is great danger to the patient.
It is therefore necessary, when you see it, according to the manner I have spoken of, concerning its brightness and length, that you make the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument we have previously mentioned. then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from below, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
And you must not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut too much, it harms the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of cutting, then you must use ingenuity in the cauterization to remove their fear.
And the manner of the cautery is sharp and keen. And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and burns with lively water, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear. And use the application of this instrument, which has this form:
And have on the head a tuft where one places the medicine, as with the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the eye.
And let the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus run out of his mouth with the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and wound.
then take your hand and apply all the medication and press down on the eye for half an hour, until you see it numbed and the stinging of the medication is soothed;
and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medication, and insert the instrument with all the cotton into the eye socket, until the cotton dries on the eye;
and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four days or five.
And if you need to repeat the medication cautery, then do so, and after the cautery wipe around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medication;
And let it be washed with cold water, and treated with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is safer than the incision or the cautery;
if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calament and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them into one pot, and put in ashes, and make them boil;
And let the pot be well sealed with strong earth, and within the pot there should be an instrument made like this: And let it be of silver or copper, and one end should protrude into the patient's mouth until the vapors rise to the eye through the nose, until the eye is anesthetized.
after which it often returns, until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the hot appearance of the abscess, because many things happen there; and do not do so when the abscess is cooling down.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and place inside it the head of an egg, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; because the eggshell does not allow the vapor to irritate the mouth, and this is a good remedy along with the treatment.
Often there are bones or fish spines lodged in the throat, or something similar;
so it is necessary that you remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sunlight with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move; ὴ
And what does not open to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach. by chance if the harsh thing comes out through vomiting
or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of apple, or a lettuce root, or a crust of dry bread. and attach to the sponge a thread, and then swallow it and when it reaches the place, it will swell up, and then you will pull on the thread 》
and if it does not come out through what we have said, take an instrument of lead according to this shape:
And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it may enter the throat more easily, and let the head be raised. And take care not to touch the epiglottis, so that the whole [throat] does not swell up, and do not push the bone inside.
And it is better that the patient himself inserts the instrument, so that he may be moved where the thing is difficult. if she [the patient] pushes downward, or draws it strongly through all the instrument equally, until it is strong.
of the blood from the throat
Sometimes bloodletting is used, as I said in the division, by means of medication treatment; and when this does not help at all, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, after you have pressed the tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
And if you see blood, then draw it with a very small hook, or with fine tweezers that are suitable for this.
And if this does not work, then take a reed and put it in the patient's throat, then put hot iron into the tip of the reed, and do this often. And if the patient is thirsty all day.
then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without choking, and move it about in their hand often. And as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument I mentioned for the fumigation of the egg.
do this many times, because it will fall without delay.
And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and let it be covered with a perforated sieve in the middle, and through that hole place the head of the instrument;
then cast your fumigation into it, and have the patient put the head of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth so that no smoke comes out, but let it go all the way to the blood;
And the bleeding will fall now, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation many times.
And let the patient be thirsty, and eat salty things and the like, and do not drink water.
And then he will need to evacuate it through this process.
And the shape of the instrument with which one draws blood is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pincers to enter into the throat. and has the likeness of a hawk's beak, and there is roughness like a file, so that what it takes, it cannot leave.
Very many similarities to an abscess are, according to what is remembered here after from one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision.
And this happens in two ways, one of which is by its very nature, due to moisture it retains.
And the second type is according to their location on the body.
car the boils of the head are different from those of the base, and the boils of the fleshy place are different from those that come on joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
And so are the abscesses that should not be pierced until the boil is mature according to its development;
And so are those that should be pierced when they are ripe, and do not mature according to their development, such as abscesses near joints.
For when boils come near joints, and one lets them until they are suppurated all around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may become corrupted, which is why this causes contraction in that limb.
Or if the abscess is near the main member, and you delay the piercing until it is mature, it will harm the main member;
or if it is near the foundation, then pierce it as soon as it is ripe.
And it is not appropriate to pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for those near the foundation, so that it does not rot inside and become elongated, leading to a fistula. xspace And may not heal within a long time.
And you must know the hour of the abscess’s perforation that has matured according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed, and the separation of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and from the debate and improvement of the abscess’s head, and the other signs;
And you must make the perforation sit in the most dependent place of the abscess, and where it opens, move.
And let the perforation be long of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and at the nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no folding. In those that bend, according to that limb.
And when an abscess is in the fleshy part, it is better that you leave the opening until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Because if you pierce it before this, the body will be elongated by the poison from it, and it is full of much filth. And perhaps it will harden the lips and make them deeper.
And if there is an abscess that has been opened according to the width of the body, according to how much the limb needs it.
And you must introduce into small abscesses, small holes; and in large abscesses, large holes, and many incisions according to the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover the heart and close them off; when they have become as thin as cloths, and are dead, then you must do as one does with buboes:
And if there are such that are split into three corners, and some that you close as the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the groin; ︎
and if it has such [dislocations], when making a round cut, and other cuts and similar incisions.
Those who do not have a head, such as a soft surface abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely;
and if the abscess is large and it has collected a great deal of pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once in that hour, but draw out some of it. then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw out more again. do this many times over several days, until all the pus comes out;
likewise if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or an old, feeble man. For the spirit sometimes jumps with the exit of the pus, which can kill the patient, and you may not notice it.
Avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have perceived your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; And if it is a clean incision, then apply linen bandages or old cotton. And if it is a large abscess and there are many holes, then you should insert a bandage into each one so that they touch each other.
And if you have cut into the abscess a piece of skin and have pulled it around, then you should fill it with old cotton or shreds of linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, then bring cold and easy water, and moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
And if the flow of blood persists, administer treatment and care, and use the powders that I have mentioned earlier in this book. If it is wintertime and the place of the abscess is very sensitive, you must apply hot compresses soaked in wine and oil.
And if it is in the summer and the place is fleshy, you must apply cold compresses soaked in water or wine until the third day, as we have said.
And then unbind the abscess and dry it and treat it as needed until it is healed.
And this is necessary to know generally in the treatment of abscesses:
As I have told you how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
Or when small abscesses come on the head, and are of the same kind as those that are in clothes, just like the eyes of a sparrow, and there are many similar ones.
There are some that are fat and such where there is moisture as well as pus;
And there are those that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the surgeon does not act contrary to this.
And the work of cutting is such that you should test with all instruments called "spoon", from which the shape comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Because if it contains moisture, then cut through from above the long (bone).
And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape away the skin without leaving anything that contains this moisture, for it always returns if something is left behind.
Then soak cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; If not, in water and salt, and fill the wound with it, and leave it until the next day. and those will run like one who has stayed up all night
And then resume the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know for sure that it does not stay in place at night;
then treat the wound with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, cut it according to this method, lengthwise; and throw away your fingernails, and scrape it from all sides, and put all your effort into pulling the cloth where it lies; ️
And if the cauterization does not work as expected, then do what I have told you afterwards.
And do the same for a pustulent abscess, in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
And cut on the pustulent and moist abscess, for it is lighter, because they contain little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses on the head where there is no moisture, such as the abscess that I cut on an old woman's head;
And I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken. And if one had struck it, it would have caused as much damage as a stone.
In other abscesses that come to a head, be it those that come to the heads of children or to the roots of the ears, the opening should always be made in the lowest possible place, so that the pus may exit.
And treat them as needed.
Often these boils occur on the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are many, and intertwined with each other.
And each scrofula is properly inside its rib, like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said. And there are many similarities between these scrofulas.
And there are many similarities between these scrofulas. There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
In that which you see well-disposed to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and moves from each side and is not harsh on the nerves of the neck or on the artery or on the passage, and is not deep.
then you must cut it from above, and peel it from each part, and extend the two lips of the heart, if necessary, as we have said in head abscesses.
and draw a little at a time, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula be neither too sharp nor cutting, so that the hand does not slip, and do not push too far forward, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not stop bleeding, then put in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stanch blood, and bandage the wound. And leave it until the abscess is relieved, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to suppurate.
And when the blood has been stanched, return to your work until it is completed.
Then search with your finger if there remain any small scabs, and cut and clean them off.
And if at the root of the scab there is a great vein, it is not fitting that you cut that scab at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall off by itself, without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
And if you cut out all the scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula. so it is necessary that you attend to cutting the root of it, and draw strongly, and sew as we have said.
so it is necessary that you attend to cutting the root of it, and draw strongly, and sew as we have said. Those scrofula which hold excessiveness, pierce there where it appears dead;
and pierce it as mentioned before, in descending order, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, then bandage it with ointment-soaked meat until it heals.
The ancients spoke and taught about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who did it, and this is a transcription of their words.
For those with squinting, it is necessary that the slit of the throat called "epiglottis" be cut. and one should not help with this, because all the veins and the throat of the patient are affected in those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both tonsils.
When the disease is in the channel of the tonsil, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid strangulation.
It is necessary therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three or four small transverse cuts, between two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the hyoid bone, not in the larynx.
and those who are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis are those in whom there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
And if the master is fearful, then he must stretch the skin of the throat to its full length, then split the heart until it reaches the chin. and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cut the sponge, as we have said.
and it is proven by the paralysis of the chin which jumps strongly at the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the time has passed where one fears suffocation, bring together the two lips of the heart wound, and suture it all alone without a needle.
then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until he is healed.
Albucasis said that this should not be done until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and is unable to breathe. Then one cuts the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
and therefore the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease had passed, and it passes in three days or four, and then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was healed;
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young woman took a knife and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the tendons of the neck;
and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found that blood had issued from it, although she had not cut a vein or artery except in the throat, and the wind was issuing strongly through the wound.
I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and cared for it until she was healed;
And it happened to the maiden that she was hoarse of voice, and she returned afterwards to her state;
therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of a coal, and it is very common in women;
and there are two kinds: natural, and accidental;
or the natural kind has no cause.
And the accidental kind is of two kinds, one of which resembles fat and the other kind resembles an abscess that comes from our artery. and there should be fear, and one must not operate with fire on those that are large, but only on the small ones, and test and seek throughout the entire intromission. If you find it like this, as if it were fat, and it does not touch any vein, then cut it off, just as one cuts the nose, and draw out all its hair, if there is any. And bandage it well immediately, and treat it as needed, until it heals perfectly.
There are many kinds of noses, about which I will tell all their similarities;
and now it is appropriate for me to describe all the differences that exist between a nose and an ulcer.
I say that an ulcer is hot and feverish as long as the inflammation has not passed and the pus has been released. Then the fever and heat subside.
With a nose, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and it begins like a boil, and grows large.
And they are according to two likenesses, either greasy or moist, and many are of color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary that when you come to the treatment of us, you first examine and inquire with all the instrument that is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be in the chapter that follows.
And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of us is that you take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has reached the heart, then according to the size of the abscess;
Then remove the probe, and be careful in this, lest it burst forth.
If running moisture has a color, incise it as I have said of other abscesses;
And if after the probe moisture comes forth, know that it is greasy, so incise it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and gently scrape each side and guard the skin where it lies so that you draw it out whole with the knot; ething
And if you cannot extract it whole, then remove it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the pain returns many times;
And if a bit remains and the wound festers, then fill the wound with some corrosive powder, close the wound, place something soothing on it, and continue other treatments until it is healed.
And if the pain is great, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it as if it were a flesh wound.
And if the vein is pulsating against you or another, then hurry and fill the place with ground vitriol, and leave it there for two days or three, until the wound festers and the bleeding subsides. Then return to the cup what remains of the nut.
Here are the forms of the interposed instruments, and there are three kinds: great, medium, and small;
and there are three types called "albaret," and one called "breb," and they come in three kinds. large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
and they are similar to the needles with which one sews sacks, and they are made of citron wood or iron or silver, and those that are yellow in color are worth more, and they are proven better for black lead to encircle the scabs of fistula;
And there are three types: Great, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
The shapes of the hooks are very similar, as you can see here:
And there are hooks that have two curves of three types likewise.
And there are hooks that have three curves and are also of three types.
And there are hooks with two curves and hooks with only one curve, all of which are of three types.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these are sharp, and there are some that cut from only one side, which are used for skinning the hands, so as not to cut the vein or nerve.
And from these intrusions are the amputated limbs returned to their places, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses;
And there are three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see.
And one does not use it anywhere except in meaty places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and elbows, and in similar places.
And sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to a scoop for stones, according to this shape, with which one stops bleeding. And it is sometimes placed in the location that heals quickly for veins and arteries, and sometimes they return according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like women's breasts;
And they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, must follow this form from this line .b to .g: Then scrape away the fat, and fill the wound with meat-based medicine, then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if the breast sags downward and is reduced due to its size, as happens with women, then make two incisions on top in two similar cuts. so that one is attached to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line .b until this line .g. And then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until it heals.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not complete, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with damp cotton in a corrosive ointment. And let it remain until it dissolves the rest and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come under the armpits are hard like scrofula with ribs, and some contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture should be incised according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day; then remove all the cotton, and treat with appropriate ointment until healed.
And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the section on scrofula, and if the wound drains pus, apply cautery as we have said before.
When the artery is severed and the skin above it is closed, often abscesses occur, and the same happens with a swollen vein and abscess.
And if one recognizes it thus when it is for the artery, then the abscess is long in depth. And when you feel it with your fingers, then you feel the constriction.
And when it is for the vein, then the wound is red and swollen.
And it is foolish to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore it is necessary to avoid the use of iron, and one who has an abscess on the head must also avoid it, and in one who has a swelling of the artery, make an incision over the skin lengthwise.
Cut the flesh as before, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed.
Then push a needle under it and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
Then press the area between the two ties with a probe until the pus comes out, and the abscess should be relieved.
Then manage the dressing in such a way that it covers well, until the ligatures fall off. Then treat with ointment as before, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you take hold of as much of the abscess as possible with your hand, then insert the needle under the place that you are holding with your hand, and make it pierce through, and there should be a double thread, so that you pull it out from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with one of the two ends of the thread to the two heads of the needle;
and if you doubt that the thread may come out too soon, then insert another needle with all of the thread underneath all of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
Then cut the abscess until the pus comes out, then cut the pus from the heart and leave that which is attached.
Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil over it, then administer treatments of linen bandages and onions until it is healed.
Just as abscesses occur in the artery and vein, abscesses also occur in nerves when they are pierced, or by excessive labor, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and feet, and in all places where there are joints. It is a serious abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it is in many forms without pain;
And when one presses it strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depths of the body, but beneath the heart.
And moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward. And that which is in the joints should not be cut with iron: 》 per adventure it would go toward constriction and he who is in the head or in the forehead, makes the skin wrinkle up.
and he who is in the head or in the forehead, makes the skin wrinkle up. If the abscess is small, hold it with pincers and cut it at its root
and if it is large, suspend it with the hook, and scrape off the skin, then remove and close the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Sometimes it occurs in the stomach and nowhere else, and it is an illness called "fungus" because of its similarity to them, and it has a subtle root and a large head
and there are some small ones and very large ones
And I saw a man who had two in his belly which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and were always split open, and moisture constantly flowed from them.
I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six, and the work in the incision is such that you should consider if the patient is moist, and the color of the artichoke is pale and moist with fine roots. If you cut it with a broad spatula, and have in your presence the fire cautery.
If you cut it with a broad spatula, and have in your presence the fire cautery. For when cutting often there is too much bleeding, and if the blood overcomes you, then hurry to cauterize.
And if you see the patient frightened and afraid of the iron incision, take a well-made willow branch, and bind it to the affected area as we have said, and leave it for two days;
And then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the willow branch until it cuts into the affected area, and each time through this process;
And if the roots are large, there is fear to cut immediately due to the abdomen, but you can cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return;
Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon which is of red-brown color and poor sensitivity and milky appearance.
Car it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the cure of the abscess afterwards.
when the wound is severe Se the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of wound or slitting of sinus, and it is on the belly and goes to some of the abscesses, as happens in other ulcers, either from blood coursing through veins or arteries as mentioned above, or from flatulence;
and if it is from the ulcer of sinus and from the discharge of boil, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and opens with various discharges. And if it comes from the exit of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses on his two hands so that he vomits, and then it returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, and it increases greatly at the entrance to the bath and through great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a minor thing, and it drains well when you press it with your hand, but do not constrict it.
and if it is due to blood, then the abscess opens with these signs: it is large and hard, and it is fixed according to its quantity; And if it is due to flatulence, then it is easy to touch, and the work is such that you must look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or flatulence.
And if it is due to flatulence, then it is easy to touch, and the work is such that you must look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or flatulence. If it is necessary that you leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the bowel, then you must instruct the patient to raise his leg and lie straight, and then sign around the wound; then command him to lie quietly between your hands, then go around the place that you have marked for all the circumference, and draw out half of the abscess above with the entire great hook; then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk tightly, and let the knot of the ligature be firm;
Then work on half of the abscess stretched over the ligament, and press your thumb inside, and seek the intestine; if you find it caught by the ligament, then free it, and push the intestine back out of the belly;
and if you find the abscess, then take it at the base, and cut off the excess;
and if the artery or vein is in the way, then go carefully around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads into them, and place the two needles around what you have done in a cross pattern that you make by piercing;
then draw the abscess in four places onto the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place until it putrefies, and each bit of dead flesh will fall away by itself; Or when you cut it, when it is rotted and corrupted, then treat the wound as needed, and remove the abscess as we have said.
Or when you cut it, when it is rotted and corrupted, then treat the wound as needed, and remove the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as needed, and close the wound.
of the sore We have said in the section on cancers, what they look like and how to treat them with medicines, and how to avoid surgical treatment.
And we say that cancer begins in the flesh, and great care is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where it can be scraped off, like cancer of the breast, thigh, or similar places, it should all be removed at the beginning.
nor has anyone ever cured one before me.
And when the work is in place and can be removed, as we have said, it is that you must sometimes purge the patient of black bile;
then make him healthy if he has an obvious fullness, then place the patient in a good spot to do the work.
then cut away your onions or warts, and the hair from all around, and remove it entirely without leaving anything behind;
and let the blood flow freely, and press the spot well with your hand or some object, and if the bleeding hinders the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is clotted; Then heal from one treatment until he is healed.
Of dropsy We have said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the gathering of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron:
and in these two similarities one should not touch with iron: that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for they are deadly things;
therefore when you treat this similarity of dropsy that is called «inflammation» with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as diarrhea and similar things;  /> If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease except only dropsy, and he is not too young nor too old, then thus should you work: lift the patient straight up in your hands, and have the assistant press the stomach by pushing the water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the pointed spatula according to this form: And let it be cut into two parts. with its point, and nevertheless it should not be so intrusive that when inserted, it can reach the intestines and cannot hurt it;
then look if the dropsy is accumulated towards the intestines: If it is necessary, you must cut three fingers' width above the base of the thumb. and if the hydropsy is due to liver disease, let your cut be three fingers' width to the left of the base.
and if it is due to the spleen, then let it be on the right, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie upon the cut so that the excesses do not flow into that weak place.
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it through, and lift your hand all the way up to the subcutaneous tissue between the skin and the fascia as if you were scraping, to the thickness of a nail or less around.
then pierce the fascia until the subcutaneous tissue comes into view, which is the place of water, then draw the instrument strongly, and push this instrument with which there is the shape: And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and it is of light brass or copper, and has at its lower part a small hole. and on one side there are three holes. and two on the other side, and one on the other.
and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision which scribes cut into the quill.
at the top is the airhole, so that when the instrument comes to the water, they now rise on the instrument.
empty then the half or third part, because if you empty more than is necessary in that hour, it may happen that the patient dies from the loss of his spirit through the arm, where he falls unconscious, or approaches death.
but in an empty place according to the quantity of its power, and according to what the patient's condition indicates, and their pulse.
then take out the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained by the wax that blocks the hole on the syringe, as I have mentioned, so that you pierce in this manner;
then renew the instrument the next day, if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water;
do this every day, and be careful not to overdo it so that only a little water remains.
And if you are unsure about the patient and leave a lot of water in them, then treat with a hot poultice or sand, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and let them drink wine. and the treatment with drying medicines should be continued until it is healed, and cauterization on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the fluid, as I said before.
Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or with a small opening, or one that is not in its proper place.
It must be pierced as soon as possible with a very fine needle according to this method:
then insert a thin reed through the hole, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four. And when he needs to urinate, remove the reed, and let him urinate, and then put it back;
and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes forth does not leave a hole open.
He whose hole is small will be treated with the pine plug as we have said, and it will widen.
those who do not have the hole in its proper place are harmed, for some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they raise their penis upwards; And cannot heal because the material cannot reach the bone, and this is a serious illness.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies on his back, then stretch the head of the rod and the handle equally as the width of a feather quill, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should be.
And beware of bleeding that often occurs there; and if it does happen, staunch it with what staunches blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the pustules of the penis Many times these baths are taken in the rod, and this is an ugly appearance of flesh;
And there are malignant and benign ones;
Si you must take them at one time with skill, then cut and clean all of them, then place upon moistened cotton in Egyptian ointment. Then continue the care with daily application until it is healed.
And if the albathe is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, then you must apply cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and if the blister is partly on the vein, with part of it under the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part that is under first. And when it has healed, then treat the rest.
For when you treat them together, it is not certain that the head of the vein will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption will occur in the vein and in the joint.
So it is necessary to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then place upon it a plaster made of honey and flour from the bark of pomegranates and peas, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
The cautery serves two purposes at once: that is to say, for the purging of blood and for the treatment of putrefaction.
and if the head of the penis is putrefied and drawn back, then you must insert a leaden probe into the urethra, and have the patient urinate through it.
and when the skin is inflamed at the tip of the penis, which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, due to a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape it with a hairy instrument until the connection is released, and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
and if it is difficult to treat this condition, then you must scrape with a spoonful of the tip of the penis and the skin.
Then quickly place between two [supports], and put one fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless when we perform this work by our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best and lightest cut for healing.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, because they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I have seen many masters and healers performing circumcisions around the foreskin, on the strong parts, and on the entire glans;
so that the cutter might cause injury because there are two layers, and if one cuts through the top layer, the bottom layer remains. Or there is fever, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is of the water, the point of the member is not secure.
and at the cleansing of the nail perhaps the iron escapes, and the work is ruined, and many times it happens that there is no need for cleansing, and I wish it to be so.
From the amputation done with silk thread I have found the advantage of the experiment, for the silk cuts evenly on top as well as below.
For when you press your hand, cut evenly in one stroke. but the thread must be well twisted around the leather;
and the method of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are not doing anything to it but tying the thread around the rod only, and then let it go in all the ways that you can;
Then let it stand straight between your hands, and replenish the powers between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
Then place your hand on the staff and blow into its heart, and pull it up until the head of the staff is inside. Then clean it well of the gathered filth, then bind the place securely with a double thread, then tie it under the armpit to another bond.
Then clean it well of the gathered filth, then bind the place securely with a double thread, then tie it under the armpit to another bond. And hold it with two fingers of the second ligament at the little finger and the index finger, and cut between the two ligaments, then lift the heart quickly and pull the head of the staff. Then let the blood flow drop by drop, for this is the cure. And put powder on it and on the powder a drape stuck with the white of a cooked egg, tempered with rose water, mixed with good and fresh oil of roses, and leave it until the next day, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
The form of the poultice for this is as follows:
Both ends should be sharp and equal in size.
The error of the poultice is when the herbs inside are wet from the incision;
Therefore, you must spread it with your fingernail, so that the place does not form an abscess.
And cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
And if they exceed three days, and that which is below the member is swollen, then leave it until the abscess has subsided, and gently scrape off the scab.
If you can move the tip as you please, and be careful of the part of the member, it will not harm him at all.
Then cure the place with sudden powdered wound, as we have said in the treatment of powders, and if the tip goes beyond measure and goes above, it will not harm.
Cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
Of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the formation of stones, or congealed blood, or bone, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the section on classification.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to a stone in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees. And let the feet be placed on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and let the patient hold his breath as long as he can. And then the neck of the bladder is forced to expel the stone above, so that the urine is released.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe," of which here is the form.
and let it be of fine silver, lightly hammered, like a bird's feather. and let the rod be one and a half palms long, and let it be fine at the end.
And the manner of issuing urine is such that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a bag of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe;
and cut off the excess of the wool and push it up to the end of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water;
Then put the syringe lightly on the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then fold the penis over towards the foreskin.
Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it reaching the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because the duct through which it passes is twisted.
Then draw out the thread all the way to the tip of the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out hard and make the urine flow.
And repeat with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
When scabbing or blood comes into the bladder, or there is rot assembled therein, and you wish to distill waters and medicines, then make for the entire instrument that is called a "clepsydra," and this is its form:
It is closed, and there are three openings: Of one side, and I of the other side, as you see.
and the leaves chosen so that the medicinal juice is such that it stops the member well without addition, so that one can draw out the moisture, and push when needed.
and when you see your medicines fall into the bladder, place the head of the kettle in the moisture, and draw out what is inside.
thus you will draw the moisture into the kettle, and then push the contents back forcefully. so the moisture will enter, and will now come to the bladder, so that the patient will feel it.
and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
And it is of silver or steel, and the head is higher;
and beneath in the chest where the ligament rests.
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the pouch with that moisture over the fire.
Then insert the nozzle of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has entered, so that the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder.
And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it evenly all around. Then push a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle together like one joins a bucket, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument.
And do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the methods of stones, and the extraction together with medicine;
And I have said the difference between a stone in the kidneys and all the signs, and in which stone one should work by cutting; And in the bladder, and in the penis.
And I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like fine water in its subtlety;
and there opens the anus, and the patient grabs his penis, and he ejaculates many times, and then it swells. and with each of these jumps the foundation shakes.
and the healing is light in children until they are four years old, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is of moderate difficulty for those who are between youth and old age.
and the treatment is lighter for those with a large stone than for those with a small one.
And when we come to the treatment, first, we must cleanse the patient with an enema, to expel all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders the search for stones.
Then take the patient by the feet and turn them upwards and move downwards so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and jumps out some time.
then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be under his thighs so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards.
Then seek and touch within;
if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall with the touch of all, then moisten your finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adolescent; and push it into its foundation, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then bring it to the neck of the bladder;
then press with your finger, and push it out from where you wish to cut.
And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and order him to extend with his right hand the testicles upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where the cut is made;
Then he applies the spatula pressing, from which comes the form: And he makes an incision between that which is between the thighs and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the vein.
and let the cut be straight over the stone, and your two fingers be close to the anus, and let the cut across it be so that it is wide on the outside, and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
by chance, the pressure from the finger in the anus causes it to jump out without work
and know that there are some stones with angles and edges: if it is obstructed from coming out
and there are others that are below, like a pea, round, whose exit is easy.
To those then who have angles and margins, make the cut larger.
And if it does not jump out, then you must pull with the pincers which are like a file at the top, to pull the stone until it is dislodged. Or you put under the instrument subtle curved at the top;
And if you cannot thus trick it, then widen the pouch where the hole is, and if the flesh tears, then constrict it with vitriol;
And if there are more than one stone, then first put the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut on top, then draw strongly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are several.
And if it is very large, it must be sawed, and a larger wound made. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine flows continuously where the wound cannot heal;
yet you should strive to extract it, or break it with pincers, until you remove it in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bandage it, and place on top a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the hot abscess. then bandage the patient around his neck, and do not untie the knot until the third day.
And when you untie it, wash the place very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of dyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healed.
And if abscesses or corrosion come to the wound, and a clot of blood in the bladder, which retains the urine so that it passes with the urine: Stick your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will run to the bladder, and will cause putrefaction.
Then raise the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in all the ways you know, until he is healed.
And it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind his two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra, and stuck there, and the urine cannot come out; then the treatment of what I say is such that you cut it many times, and thus he is freed from cutting through this treatment. I have already proven this thus.
Take iron with a shape like this, and it should be fixed at three corners on one stake:
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
then insert the punch lightly into the shaft until it reaches the stone; and turn the punch in your hand gently against the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
then the urine will come out, and press your hand against what remains of the stone inside the shaft. Then it is immediately broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
and if you cannot do this because of any obstruction, then tie a thread below the stone and another above it, then make an incision in the shaft toward the stone between the two ties, then draw it out forcefully, and untie the threads, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound; ))) And let the treatment continue until healed.
of the stone of women
It often happens that stones are lodged in women, and if it does occur, the treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons.
One reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin.
And the second reason is that one cannot find a woman well-versed who reveals herself to physicians, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-versed in this hand-based art.
And the fourth manner is that the stones in women are more deeply embedded than in men, which requires a deeper cut, and there is great fear. And if necessity compels you, then you must find a knowledgeable midwife, but they are rarely found, and if you cannot find one, then seek a subtle chaste physician.
And it presents a wise midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and commands her to do what you command her concerning the investigation of the stone; and take great care to see if the woman is a virgin:
and take great care to see if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the vagina and search for the stone;
and if she finds it, she should press it under her finger, and commands that she insert her finger into the vagina of the patient, and seek out and press her left hand strongly on the bladder.
If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder downward until it reaches the base of the thigh;
then cut on the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where it is most prepared, and the patient will feel the bone in that part. and do not move his finger on top or beneath the bone, and let the cut be small at first;
and do not move his finger on top or beneath the bone, and let the cut be small at first; then insert the reed into the cut, if you feel the bone, narrow the wound so that the bone may come out more strongly, and know that there are many kinds of bones:
these are: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with edges.
If you know the signs, you will know the outcome.
And if the blood overcomes you, apply powdered vitriol to the place, and let it sit for an hour until the blood is stanched.
Then return to your work, until the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I have told you for extracting stones in men to help you in your work;
And if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the place and bandage with cloths and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not pull it out, lest the patient die by chance; Then heal the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the place healed, return to your work until the stone is passed.
"Ramice" means a kind of cloth used to bind wounds. Therefore, an aquous ramice is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white silk under the skin of the kidneys, which contains the egg;
and it is called "silk," and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that this is another egg. And this is the skin of the eye between the white part that we have said.
and this would not happen if it were not for pus. And the cause of this collection is due to weakness in the kidneys, which spreads this substance.
And sometimes it comes from striking the eyes, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a yellowish color, or it is without red, or black, or white like water, and this happens more often;
and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white part that we have said, then the abscess is thin, the pus long like an egg, and the eye does not open, because it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the proper fabric, then the abscess is thin with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the coccyx and the white flesh, then one feels it well.
Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test the entire intromission area from which the form comes before. According to that which follows the instrument, judge what is within it.
And when we cure it with fire, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body.
Then have him lie on his back, on something a little high, and put many blankets under him;
Then sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs at the base of the coccyx.
Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the coccyx along its length until near the anus, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the coccyx down to the white flesh, and delicately scrape according to your ability.
Then pierce the sponge full of water through a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put your fingers in, and swell the sponge upward;
And do not touch the core of the kidneys, but only the sponge; Cut all or in pieces evenly the flesh from him subtly, so that if you do not cut well wisely, the water will come back;
And if the egg jumps forward from your work, return it to its place when you have completed the sponge's task;
Then sew together the two leaves of the kidney core with one stitch, then heal it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you bind the vessels that are bleeding, suspecting the flow of blood;
Then cut the string with all the suspending parts, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if the vessel is divided into two parts together, know that these are two veins; Then cut the other part in the same way as you did the first, then wipe away the blood, and place a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil on the wound.
Then cut the other part in the same way as you did the first, then wipe away the blood, and place a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil on the wound. And place another piece of cloth soaked in wine and oil on top, and put on the two strings, and put double-layered bandages on top, and bind it all up with all the ligatures according to this form:
Then take two bandages and stuff them with wool according to this pattern, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and one of the strings should go from the anus up to the back, and the other to the scrotum.
And let the other two heads be on the two ankles, and all the ligaments should be bound together in the elbow loop.
And sometimes this ligature is treated with a cautery in place of an iron cut. This means you should take a subtle surgical cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and it should be heated as we have said, so that the white part which contains water is uncovered.
Then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white part at the testicles, and it should be burnt with this hot subtle cautery.
And cut in all ways that you can, until you burn everything.
and make sure the fire does not touch the testicle.
and know that this work is more healing; and moving cautions against bleeding, and bandages to prevent the work of incision;
and if any thing goes contrary, whether it is an abscess or bleeding or anything else, then treat what goes contrary to you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this work because of its horror, then introduce perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain through the signs that we have said that aquous humor is there, then make the patient sit on a high seat; etti. then pierce the abscess in the lower part as wide as possible, and place the perforation along the length of the body;
And let the holes be wide so that all the water flows freely;
Then place cotton on the spot, bind it, and allow the rest of the water to drain, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the white cloth does not allow water to exit from the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or an instrument for removing water from hydrocephalic patients, as described above.
And widen the wound, and know that the water will return and be collected again after six months or a year, and when it is collected as before, then the patient will pass his days.
Know that in cutting this vein there is fear of many complications, which is why I think it is better to leave it alone.
And I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
So I say that many abscesses come to the body, especially to the joints; and this is very common.
This is to say by an excessive acute and sharp humour that spreads to the joints, or from blunt trauma;
and the colour of the abscess depends on the colour of the body; and it experiences no pain, yet the abscess is severe;
and sometimes the abscess is feared and dreadful, with a reddish colour, and occasionally it comes from a nodule of artery, or from swollen veins.
When it is from a nodule of artery, it is known by the hot nature of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; And it is not necessary for you to touch it.
He who is affected by the swelling of a vein is known by his propensity to express at the touch of fingers, and one can well make an incision on this similarity, and on other scars; And it is that you cut the heart of the kidneys, then elevate the egg above, and draw the white thread outward, and deliver the suspending parts from all around the egg.
If the egg is already hardened with these scars born, then it is necessary that you draw out the egg and the cut;
And if it is on the surface or in that which is within the vessels, then you must deliver all this tendon and cut it roundly.
Et si les racines de la chair sont à l'arrière du lieu, alors il faut que tu coupes toute la chair et extrais le pus, comme nous l'avons dit.
And when your work is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then perform other treatments until it is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bud, with the softening of the cheeks, and if the patient goes away, he becomes very ill.
And the treatment of this disease is almost as dangerous as the one mentioned before, nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
You must make the patient sit on a raised seat, then wrap the suspenders of the cheeks down to your thighs, with all the vessels that are near the penis, and pull them strongly.
Then cut with a broad, sharp spatula across the vessels, until they are uncovered, and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the temples' arteries;
then he inserts a needle with two threads, and ties it at the first place where the vein has come, and ties it again at the other end; then he cuts them in half straight down, according to the length of the body, and draws out the putrid moisture;
then he treats the wound as with others where one inserts a bone, so that some vessel is filled which nourishes one of the eyes;
for by this means no harm comes, and if the eye becomes blind in all vessels, then it is necessary to draw out the eyes from all vessels; so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
The events of this hernia occur through the incision that comes in the groin, or the extension on the stomach in the inguinal region, which causes the intestines to descend from that opening into one of the testicles.
And this opening is in the groin, or the extension of it, and these two types occur for many reasons.
from a blow, or a jump, or a sneeze, or lifting a heavy object, and from similar things;
And the signs when it is an extension of the groin are that it occurs little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. And the abscess is equal to the groin, because the groin presses on the intestines.
And the sign that it is of the section in the sinus is that at first it causes sudden pain, and the abscess has various appearances under the skin nearby, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine and the body outside of the sinus.
And sometimes the rings go with the intestines, and are retained therein, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these cauterizations with iron, because of fear, one must avoid them.
And the manner of the work is such that you instruct the patient to pull out the intestines with his hand within the wound, if he can reach. then support him on his neck, between your hands, and lift the thighs;
then press the heart downwards, and cut all the skin of the testicles from top to bottom. then push inside the intestines of the belly some hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the feces may exit.
then remove the fat that is under the skin of the testicles, so that all parts of the hard white fat are exposed.
then insert your finger into that which follows the testicle, in that which is between the white fat under the skin of the egg, and between the second fat layer, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second fat layer.
And then move to the right hand inside the heart of the kidneys, and extend the white silk up to your left hand, and lift the egg towards the waist with all the silk. And instruct the assistant to extend the egg upward, and untie what is tied behind the binding.
And ask your two assistants if there is any part of the intestine wrapped in hard white silk, and if you find anything, push it down into the stomach.
Then take a needle with a thread made of ten threads, and push it into the rear part of the silk, which is behind the skin of the kidneys. After the waist, then cut the threads that appear from the needles, until there are four threads. Then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie them with a strong cord of two parts; Then wrap the heads with thread, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that no creature that nurses them can enter inside, lest an abscess form there; And put the cord back in place according to the first long cord, and after these two cords leave a piece of the thread that is under the skin of the knees the width of a finger; And then all the rest according to the roundness that the egg bears;
Then cut in the part that is under the skin of the knees until the blood runs and boils, as we have said before;
Then introduce wet wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wounds, and there introduce the bandage that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white flesh is cauterized as we have said, after the incision, out of fear of bleeding. For this happens often, and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself;
and if it is slow to fall off, then wash it with hot water, and place (it) on that which we have said, until it falls off;
then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
of flesh hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cut with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done as with the string that is with the screw, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after cutting slightly above and below;
then cut in half, and treat the abscess with that which works, until the vessel falls out;
And let the treatment be as we have said, until he is healed.
Sometimes there is fracturing in joints, as we have said, and the place opens;
And no one should discharge from the intestines like dogs, and if they do, it is little, and it closes up every hour.
Yet if it remains too long in this state, the wound or ulcer grows until the intestines discharge.
And this happens due to the extension of the ulcer that is in the joints, as we have said, for it becomes extended and the place is softened and swollen and open.
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and the patient should lie on their back between your hands, then strike the swollen area with a broad blade according to the size of three fingers;
and then extract the pus that is beneath the skin with a hook, then take the cautery iron and place it on the visible part of the wound;
and press firmly with your hand, then place the cautery iron on the two visible parts of the wound on top of the hook, and burn both places;
then remove the cautery iron and do not cut the wound or spread any ointment or other substance, as I have taught you in the treatment of intestinal rupture; Then the treatment by treating the wounds.
Then the treatment by treating the wounds. And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it is healed.
The incision is tight, and has no appearance in the suture, and the cautery is better in this place, and closer to healing.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles in some men is softened because the glands within are softened, and this is evident to see.
and it is necessary that when one wants to cure it, the patient lies on his back, and one cuts the softened skin onto the natural skin;
then sew together the two lips in one stitch, and if you wish, first sew down the excess skin with three or four strong stitches.
then cut between the stitches, and treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed, and the threads fall out.
Of the castration
Know that castration is considered a disgrace in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to speak of it in this book.
And there are necessary for two ways:
which is one of them that the physician knows how to answer when asked, and knows the cure;
and the other is because we often have need of castration of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and dogs and other animals.
Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
In that which we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand until they are retracted and you no longer feel them.
Of castration by cutting: It is necessary that you dye the beast, and press the skin of the testicles to your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut on each testicle with one stroke, when you have well scraped them;
and leave any pouch of the scrotum and the fine scrotum that is on the vessels;
and this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, because in the case of attraction, there may remain something from the testicles, which causes the beast to desire lust.
then heal the wound until it is healed.
et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men: one way is that between the two testicles there appears as if by the design of nature like a woman, where there is hair, and sometimes urine flows from it.
Et tels estre ne puet avoir en nule manere d’enfanz: quar il ne poet pas faire l’un ne l’autre office de sa nature.
And the cure of a man and a woman is such that you cut all the flesh close together, and treat it as other wounds.
in the second manner, of the men whose urine comes out through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
A tumor is flesh that has grown on the natural part, until it becomes very ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
It is necessary that you cut away the excess of the tumor with your hand or with scissors, and cut it lightly;
and do not go too deep, so that blood does not come out, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And to another wound that forms at the mouth of the uterus, and fills it, and perhaps jumps forth, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease". If necessary, you must cut it, as we have said regarding the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
It occurs when the woman's nature is not clear, or the opening is small. and it is caused either by birth, or by accident due to a disease that has come upon her.
and it is caused either by birth, or by accident due to a disease that has come upon her. or it is caused by a deep wound, or by a subtle or thick secretion, and it is formed deep within the uterus, or on its sides, or beneath it, wherever it may be.
and prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps even menstruation.
And the recognition of this is by the gaze of the wound.
If the blindness seems imminent, let it be near your hands or feet.
If it is subtle in color and is near two pounds, hasten, and do thus:
Place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread;
then weigh out the two pounds firmly until the subtle color is gone, and the swelling has passed.
Then take wool, and soak it in oil, and place it on the spot, and have the woman lie down every day so that it cannot close.
And if the syphilis is hard and thick, you must cut it with a scalpel similar to a myrtle leaf blade.
If the swelling is of flesh and bone, then suspend it with an onion and cut it;
And have the medicines that staunch blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, together with plenty of egg.
then bring a wide lead spoon, so that the wound cannot close
and let it be thus for a long time, and bring him a tent of dry linen
then let him be treated with other treatments until he is healed.
And when a char is born into the womb, it must be covered in this manner, unless it is an encrusted abscess. For the encrusted abscess that is in the womb, one should not touch or make fire.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins which, without a covering, are usually exposed, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become hard.
and we have already said in the division their appearance, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and the hardened ones, when they are deep in the womb and do not appear to be felt, then treatment by fire is not appropriate.
Those who are at the mouth of the wound, where one can feel them, are those that can be healed.
Therefore, you must place the woman in a cold house, then cauterize with tongs, and cut out its roots, then sprinkle on powdered hemostatic medicines such as vinegar, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things.
Then make him put his feet against the wall for an hour, then put them in cold water.
And if blood continues to flow from there, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple tree bark, and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice on her back with it.
And if it festers, it is good. If not, then let air out through cupping glasses on the back and breasts without pricking;
Then take wool, and soak it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and let it out in that place.
And when the abscess has subsided, then treat the place with onion oil until it is healed.
And that which is called "albathir" is red, and it resembles the sharp point, so you must cover it as I have said for the telul. And then let the wound heal until it is healed.
Many kinds of abscess come to the shin, such as chancre and piercing abscess and herpes and carbuncles and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, I must say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes on the back, which is not one of the abscesses that grow big;
and if you want to know the work of iron, then consider whether the abscess is acute at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and whether it turns red if you can see it. Then do not hasten to pierce, but let the abscess ripen until the pain is relieved;
And then have the patient sit on the seat, and let there be two small seats where he leans back, and supports his back and gathers his feet together outside the leg.
And let his thighs be spread wide, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good ligature.
Then give the patient something to drink towards his right side, and bring the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the wound, from which then comes the shape.
And it is necessary that when you see the instrument being brought near, that you first insert a reed to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient. And if the instrument is too large, it must be covered with cloths to prevent it from hurting.
And he must put the horn of the instrument on top and dip the instrument.
And when the abscess opens and one makes an opening in the soft part of the hand, it must be covered at the top with spathe milk.
And when the wound is emptied, then you must put moist linen cloths in rose oil or in dry green oil into the wound.
And place the edge of the cloth inside the wound at the bottom of the flesh, and place another on top of the flesh and on the joint clean linen moistened in boiled water or mallow.
Then the treatment after two days of soaking, as long as it is healed;
and sometimes the scab and the wound are lifted by an enema of water and honey, and then with water and roots of lily and long-stemmed plants that have been cooked; then it returns to soaking.
And if the wound is festering in the marrow, then you must be careful not to burn with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural process of childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pushing downwards, and desiring to smell the air:
then the child hastens to exit by force. then know that this birth is according to the natural process, and the exit is under its head, and the afterbirth with it.
And when you see these signs, then it is necessary to gently press on his belly, so that the child comes out quickly;
for when he descends onto his head, then the placenta comes with him, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses by a good cleaning;
and those who come otherwise do not come naturally.
For sometimes he comes on his feet, and sometimes he comes out violently through the body or the head, and the hands, or he comes on his belly, or sometimes, and he is turned by chance onto his neck, and in other bad forms;
it is necessary for the midwife that she be wise and skilled in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the forms in which one must assist her.
Se the child comes out of its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth in pain, and the child's strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, where the women hold her;
and let its nature be of oil or fenugreek, which has been cooked, and then pour the bath between her teeth a little spoonful of which the form is here: and cut the afterbirth, and scrape off at her fingernail until the moisture that is within runs out;
and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman a clyster of fenugreek mustard with sesame oil;
then have her take and sneeze pepper, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: If one extracts the child now.
And if both hands come out forcibly, then you must reset them lightly bit by bit; and if they cannot go back in, then place the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up high; then knock the stool over onto the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall during the toppling.
and if the hand cannot go back in and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife that was placed here before, and extract the child, and reset it likewise.
of the child’s birth on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, one must push it upwards; and then turn it bit by bit until it is even.
Then take a hold of one foot and extend it little by little.
When he can jump to his knees, then instruct him to grasp it, and make it sneeze conditionally; if he jumps farther, God willing.
And if he does not jump as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is according to the natural figure. For then it is easily done.
And if he does not come farther as we have said, then take mullein of hart's-tongue, and oil of balsam, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and place this ointment on the woman's genitalia inside and outside, then make her sit in hot water up to the ribs.
And when she is well soaked beneath, give her a potion of myrrh, and place it beneath, and leave it there for an hour. then have her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child is about to jump out now.
of the child's exit on its knees When the child comes in this manner, then have the midwife place her hands little by little; then have her sit back on her heels, and let her feet hang down, and she should lie on the bed. and let her bend her hands little by little, and then have her place her hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from beneath, so that she is prepared below. And if the child does not jump out, take her feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then push with your hands. And give the child little by little; and instruct the woman to take hold of herself until the child comes out.
of the issue of the child which comes from a wide hand hanging It is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then lift up the woman and let her walk.
if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed and spread her legs wide.
then apply the instrument that I have described.
and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, then study to bring back the hand. and give the child according to its natural form, and make it sneeze, and instruct her to take hold of herself until the child comes out strongly.
of the issue of the child on its neck, and with hands spread out, and face turned towards the back of its mother. It is necessary that the patient keep their hand still, then turn it a little at a time, and move it gently.
And when it is healed, put on the natural balm of althea and oil, as we have said, then instruct them to move it a little at a time.
And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and tell her to take hold. And make her sneeze. De this same manner to all the secondine
De this same manner to all the secondine When it comes out this way with all the snot, cut the mucus with your fingernail until the moisture is emptied.
And if the child vomits on its face and neck, cut it off from the mouth so that it is not retained, and let the child die.
Then push the child inside, until you have placed it as needed, and instruct the woman to take some time.
of the birth of twins Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four at once; And this is not an unusual thing, nor does it happen often. Two are strange things, and do not live, if at all;
Two are strange things, and do not live, if at all; I know these, that they are multiple, and are divided by the umbilical cord that surrounds them, which is tied to the womb;
And sometimes they come out as naturally as one alone, as we have said.
And if they come out violently, then treat it as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and act quickly and lightly as she knows how. And make sure to do so in such a way as to promote healing. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, and even more up to fifteen, and all are formed in the shape of a child by the measuring of the wise Glorious One, and it is necessary that the midwife knows all this, for perhaps similar things may happen; do so accordingly.
of the dead child
When you care for a woman who has had a stillbirth or miscarriage, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands; then you must know if the woman is of sound health, and has no complications or fear of death;
If necessary, let the woman be placed on her back, and her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And let the midwife apply the scissors in two parts, so that she is tied to the bed and not moved during the birth of the child.
Then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oil, mixed with a paste of althea and fenugreek and flax seed, then let the midwife anoint her hands with these oils and pastes.
Then gently insert them into the mother, then seek out the place where she inserted the ointments, and take care to see if the child is prepared to descend onto its head.
If the ointments are inserted into his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the chin or in the armpits or near the ribs, and if the descent is onto the feet, then insert it into the big toe and in the middle of the ribs.
And it is necessary that he holds the awl in his right hand, and places the handle between his fingers of the left hand, and pushes with all his hand lightly, and drives the awl into one of these places that we have said, until it reaches the empty space;
Then drive against the other awl, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal.
And then they are equally extended by moving from one side to the other, so that it comes out easily, and the awls should be toothed to hold well, as shown in this figure:
And if a part remains, then anoint the wound with some oil from his fingers, and push it into that part, and pull out the other part;
And if any remains behind, then place this ointment in a higher place, and do this until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned due to tightness, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it all comes out. Then cut in the joint of the foot or with the heel, and thus you must do with the other hand and both feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is tight at the outlet, or if there is sharp water collected at the head, then you must put a thorny spatula between your fingers, pierce the head and draw out the water. Or take to the instrument that is called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments in the following chapter.
And do the same if the child has a large head naturally;
And then draw out the bones with tweezers, and if the head jumps out and is stuck in the forceps, it should be cut open until the moisture that is in the worst part comes out.
And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as best you can;
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must puncture until the moisture runs out.
And if the child is standing on its feet, then the pulling is gentle, and the placement at the mother's breast is easy.
And if it is narrow in the belly or in the chest, then you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand. And if it punctures the belly or the breast, until the moisture within is corrected.
And if other members are removed and the head remains, then the healer should insert his hand into the depth of the wound and draw it out to the mouth of the wound. Then he places one or two fingers in and draws it strongly.
And if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, it is not necessary to work on it, but rather one should apply moist and fatty substances. And the healer applies poultices, soaking them in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can turn it over, then treat it as we have said for a living child.
And if one cannot do it, then draw it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the arrowhead.
And when you have done this, if it happens that what we have said comes to pass in abscesses like those which come on the thighs;
and if bleeding occurs, place it in boiling water to stop the flow, and apply other treatments.
And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had died in, and then another was conceived above it, and that one also died. After a long time, she developed an abscess in the breast, which swelled until it burst, and began to discharge greatly.
I was called to treat it, and thought long about it, but the wound could not heal.
I placed a strong drawing plaster on it, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one. I was very astonished by this, for there are no bones in the belly.
So I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
I saw the wound, and drew many bones from it until the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived for a long time thus, and a little pus always came out of the place.
and I have not written this chapter except because when the master finds something strange, he should know how to provide help.
Here follows the form of the press, for which we use the books;
and at two turns are two keys of two locks. However, the horns should be more subtle in the restrictor, and should be made of boxwood or ebony;
and the mouth of the wood should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the tree one finger, and in length a palm and a half; and between the two locks there should be two supports of this same wood, which are fixed in one and the other, half a palm long or slightly more;
and these two supports are fitted into the mouth of the matrix to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter, should be made from boxwood or ebony, according to the shape of the pincers; And it should have two heads and two settings, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width.
And when you see the instrument open completely, let the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging and her legs spread apart, then insert the two settings closely together into the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs. Then work your hand on the entire instrument in the same way you did with the pincers, according to the quantity by which you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until the patient does what she wants.
This instrument is all surpassed, and their likenesses are multiplied. And when the mirror has prepared them, so much the more hurried is the work, and higher for men by their quantity.
Do not despise the instrument before you have prepared it, for its necessity is inexcusable.
When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze by condiment, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose. And if she dies from this, it is good.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put in it herbs that can open the woman's mouth, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury; All these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked in water over the fire.
Then put a tube or hole from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and hold it until the steam enters the mouth.
Then make them sneeze, as we have said. Si la seconde fois hâte-toi.
And if she remains after this treatment, and is not cured, as we have said. Command the nurse to moisten her left hand in oil of sweet almonds or musk-scented oil of althea, then insert it into the vagina, and seek the second uterus; and when she has found it, take hold of it and draw it out little by little straightly, so that the patient does not feel pain at the extraction.
but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, then pull. it will come out and dislocate again.
And if the mouth of the nose is narrowly constricted, we have said the cure of sneezing, and of fumigation with herbs;
and if it does not come out from all that we have said, beware that you do not pull too hard;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the nose, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then give her an enema with four-leaf medicine. so she will vomit and expel it, and then fart.
but nonetheless, when she farts, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient. If it is therefore necessary, appropriate fumigations are required for this purpose:
any of the ancients have proven fumigation with fresh watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for retaining the menses and the afterbirth is as follows:
And it is like a reed, and one places the subtle end into the body, and the wide ends over the fire;
and let the fumigation be on the charcoal, and continue until it is completely burned out, then repeat with another one.
Many children are born whose fundament is not yet pierced, but rather closed by a thin membrane: therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her finger, and do not pierce it with a sharp stick, and take care that she does not touch it with pus; ︎
then place on it a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then continue the treatment of poultices until he is cured.
Et si vous avez des doutes qu'il ne guérira pas, alors insérez dans l'ouverture un morceau de plomb, et laissez-le en place pendant moins de jours, et retirez-le lorsque l'enfant veut aller aux toilettes.
And sometimes this swelling comes suddenly from a wound or an abscess; then it is necessary to cover that sudden (swelling) immediately: if it is healed, just as we have said of the linen of lead.
Fistulas that come from under the anus are knots, and those that come beside the anus outward, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or several; ‌
and when that knot is old, it works, and causes more moisture, which is white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
And they are known by this: that it comes out in egestion or ventosity when the patient passes waste, and sometimes one jumps out.
And there are fistulas that go all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and reach as far as the junction of the thigh, and even to the tip of the scrotum.
And thus one knows if a fistula is present at the anus, or not present: and it is that you put your index finger into the anus, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, then insert a fine lead tent or a horse hair into it, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger;
And if you do not feel it, and neither excrement nor flatulence nor feces come out of the anus, as we have said: know that it does not burst; if you hasten with the cure.
And when the fistula reaches the bladder or the passage of urine, then urine leaks out, and it cannot be healed by medicines.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tentacle comes to the place; if there is no twisting and the pain spreads around, it is likely that it will come out immediately, and neither medicine nor a sudden poultice will be of any use;
And in these Persian fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish doctors who meddle with them.
In those that are not Persian and not very old, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is for the patient to lie on his back between your hands;
And he raises his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined towards his belly; then put an iron tent, or of lead if there is crookedness, so that you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, if you then feel that the tent has pierced;
and let it be uncovered where you feel between your finger the pus or flesh, then know that it is perforated; do not tamper with it if it cannot be healed.
However, one can indeed heal some [cases], but this happens rarely;
and the aid consists in heating the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; And he pours all hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the anus. And do this two or three times, until you know that these warty growths are burned, which resemble a bird’s feather.
And then treat it with moistened bandages soaked in butter, until those warts come out, and then treat with a salve to prevent inflammation and heal.
If he is thus treated, this is good.
If this cannot be cured otherwise;
and if the abscess enters and does not perforate as far as the bone in the anus, and there is a thick covering of flesh or pus between your finger and the abscess, and you see the fistula at that place where the covering joins. si la cautérisation commence dès le début de la fistule, et puis cautérise ensuite,
and there will be no trace remaining.
And if the pus overcomes you and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicinal vinegar.
il chasse la maladie qui est dedenz, et fait cicatriser le plaie de dehors. et li cauteres de feu fait tant qu’il n’i puet durer ne remedier.
et sachez que nule autre cose ne poez aider fors le cautere de feu.
Et sachies que li cauteres de feu est plusors foys nesces en ceste maistrie.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula reaches as far as the anus, and is distant from the body, then you should pour oil or wine into the anus, and inquire about this.
If you feel the tent, and there are two fabrics or cloths or tents within it, which is about to tear, then let there be no one inside except for those who are trustworthy and hopeful, by means of one of the three methods:
Or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the bottom, or if you can, place tents there and treat as before;
And do not go too deep, lest you cut the foundation that holds the bottom, and the evacuation comes out involuntarily; Then treat it as we have said;
Then treat it as we have said; Perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it has been cut near the bottom, either by tent or by another suitable instrument. Then cleanse the wound with a poultice as best you can; then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the area below the anus:
then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the area below the anus: this would be easier for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are like this: and it is when you insert the tent into the fistula, which is near the edge of the anus on the skin above, then take a pointed tent according to this form: And you push a twisted thread into it, and push the tent along with all of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the top.
If it is passing through the margin of the anus inside, then draw out the thread from that hole, so that you insert your finger into the anus;
and pull out the end of the thread, and tie the two ends together, and hold them firmly against each other, and leave it for one or two days;
And sometimes it restricts, so much so that the son cuts those carts that are between two, and they fall.
then heal the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the fistula does not burst, then make it burst in all ways that you can, unless it is too deeply embedded. For it is not necessary to cover the ulcer with a cap so deeply, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spine-like stylus used to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and cutting; and on the other side no, so that you do not cut what should not be cut, as you can see here:
There are two types of emollients: or they are inside the rectum, like resin grains, and there can be small and large ones, and blood always flows from them, and there is one or several of them, and they are outside the rectum and at the opening of the rectum;
But those which lack moisture have little of it, and sometimes a little yellow water or blood, and they retain the body's color.
And the treatment for those who have them in the anus is to instruct the patient to sprinkle on himself so that he may go into rooms until the anus releases them, and the threads appear. If you hurry, and you grasp it with pincers, or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots;
And if the tweezers cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with a cloth or thread, or a piece of camlet. And pull them with your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders that are suitable for cauterization on top. When you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then proceed with other treatments until he is healed.
And if the foundation cannot come out, then enema the patient with a biting and harsh enema to clean what is in the foundation, so that it may come out freely. When the patient has hemorrhoids and if the threads are protruding from the foundation, then the treatment is light.
When the patient has hemorrhoids and if the threads are protruding from the foundation, then the treatment is light. And do this: you take them with your nail or tweezers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until he is healed, and that he fears the incision by iron. So it is necessary that you make the suture in this manner:
So it is necessary that you make the suture in this manner: Grasp the thread twisted, and put it in a needle, then pull the thread on top and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide.
And strain the thread strongly, then tie a knot in the thread, and pull out the needle, and do thus with all the others, and leave one for running the superfluity of blood.
Then put on a bandage soaked in rose oil or wax, and put it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then leave them until they become suppurating, and when they have fallen out, then treat them with salve and other treatments, until they are healed.
Of dryness of the intestines in the lower body It often happens that there is dryness of the intestines in the bowels, due to natural constraint, and when the illness is old and medication does not help. If it is necessary for you to remove the scab with the tip of a spatula or your nail on top, do not allow it to moisten. then heal it until it is dry as it should be;
and if it cannot dry out, then repeat the scraping more strongly than before, so that it heals well and is peeled off. then heal it until it is healed.
from shivering Formica is a small appearance of hair under the skin, and it goes very deep into the body;
and sometimes the cold finds it, and one feels it as if dead with trembling, and it spreads throughout the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
And the treatment is such that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong quill from an ox, and place that quill on the trembling, so that the circle around the trembling turns purple all around. Then turn your hand to the whole chain so that you cut all around the freckle, and put it in completely, and eradicate the freckle from its roots.
And if you see this, do it with a reed of bronze or iron in the same way, and let it be thin below and pointed above. Do not pierce, but instead hold to the two (sides), and press firmly.
And if you see it, then cauterize the freckle as is described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes one makes a cluster of silver or gold, or melted iron or brass;
and sometimes one makes these instruments small or large, according to those for whom they are prepared. Therefore, those that are prepared for the care of children who are weak and suffering should be small.
Therefore, those that are prepared for the care of children who are weak and suffering should be small. The form of the small or large clyster is thus wide at the top, where the stomach is tied in this manner:
And if there is an obstruction where the intestines are tied, as you see, and the head is pierced within;
And let there be on one side two holes, and on the other side one hole.
And let the belly, into which the medicines are placed, be of an animal's bladder or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and between each hole there should be one finger's width, then insert into these holes a strong thread, twisted like a cross or around, and gather the belly together as if it were a goat; And when the medicine is inside, then bind it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then perform an enema.
And this is the shape of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or a similar substance, then gently insert it. Then the minister wrings his hands together until they are completely empty, then he inserts the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, then he holds it as long as he can. And if he sleeps through the night, then there is even greater aid.
And if you enema him in the disease of diarrhea, and the medicine hastens to exit, then repeat it until he is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are in the rectum or abscess, let the clyster be as thin as for a child;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which the skin is drawn tight:
We have already said in the section on the treatment of wounds;
Or we will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to their completeness.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by falling of stone, and cutting with sword and knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
where they are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck or the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with the simple head wounds, because their treatment will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from falling stone or similar things, and the skin is torn open and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess: If there is a little blood from the wound, immediately bandage it from the head itself, and let the bandage be on the opposite side of the injured part.
And let the patient avoid drinking wine and eating heavy foods.
And if he does not wish to bandage it, let his food be reduced, and let him not drink wine, nor eat meat.
And put on the wound, if there are swellings there, only a little cotton soaked in rose oil or in stiptic wine.
And if there is no hot swelling, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by the air, a powder which I will mention in a moment.
And if the fire has moved it, apply some poultices until he is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of a sword or similar, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, then join them by sewing, as I will explain in the case of stomach wounds, using sewing.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it hangs loose, and is only attached by a thread, then cut it off; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, also like beans, and similar things.
And if you find rottenness in the skin, and it reaches to the bone, then cut away all the rot, throw it out, then treat it.
and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped with medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it off with a thread. And if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light: And this is that you put in this powder that seals before the fire has moved it.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and powder it finely, and fill the wound, and bind it tightly, until it heals well and adheres to all its flesh.
And then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell; For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this with quicklime alone, when one does not have frankincense or dragon's blood, but that the heat has moved the wound.
And if the fire has moved the wound, even in summer, one should not put this powder on it.
But apply some cooked ointments or poultices made from barley flour with water and honey, until the wound casts off. Then cure with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, draw it out with fine tweezers;
and I will tell you about fractures of the head later.
of the neck wound
If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and one in the head, but if a nerve of the neck or an artery is cut.
If it is a nerve, there is no other remedy than to leave the wound alone and not apply anything that might constrict it, for this harms the nerves and causes them to recede. And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but the medicine should be warm, like hot water with sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and wash the cuts in the same way with sweet water, and other small stones according to this manner, and moist compresses.
And if the wound is large, stitch it and bind with bandages, then let it heal until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and they have festered and are full of pus, then pierce them in a lower place.
And if the vein is cut and blood flows out, then expose it, clean it, and cauterize it if necessary.
And if the windpipe or the trachea is cut and the passage is kept open so that food can pass, then stitch the trachea onto the skin of the neck, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape. And then he holds it firmly, and leaves it for some days, then treats it with dried onions until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, seek it out; And if there are bone fragments, draw them all out if you can, and those that you cannot extract, leave until the wound heals over and the openings close.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound, and it has an abscess, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a stab wound or a cut, and the wound is deep, observe if gas comes out of the wound when the patient inhales: know then that the wound is mortal;
And if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in at the first hour, nor bind it for fear that the blood does not flow deeply, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient. but apply an attracting ointment, and bandage it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more. thus there will not be any spasm, nor evil shaking of the heart, nor fainting. and when you see these good signs, know that the wound is saved. Heal him then with poultices and other treatments until he is healthy.
And if she cannot heal, and it works again, know that there is a fistula.
If the treatment is done as it should be. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, either worse or on the back, then treat it as for those in front. If it is large, with stitching;
And if it is small, with powder. And if it is near the bone and has broken into pieces, seek to clean the wound and remove any splinters if they are exposed. And if they are not exposed, then let the wound fester, for this will ease the extraction.
And of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
of the rupture of the belly
The rupture of the belly is great and moderate and small;
of the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerve of the intestine, because of which the introduction of air;
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is more difficult to put the intestines back in unless they are replaced hot on hot.
because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, and they return less easily; and therefore the moderate wound is better, because one returns the intestine to its place more than in other [types of wounds]
And know that wounds of the belly are according to IV manners:
the II common sewings happen in the sewing of the belly, and the sewing of other wounds of the body and II other special sewings are common to other wounds;
nevertheless they are more specific with the sewing of the belly, and I will speak of each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine has come out, and it is a good thing to return, this is by one of the II manners: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen by cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or a clean cloth in warm water only, or boil in hot water with juniper and clove, and wash the intestines until the swelling is gone;
and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it is said that only sloe berries are used to reduce swelling.
And when you see the swelling leave, then moisten the intestines in water where mallows and hollyhocks have been boiled, for by this the entrance is made easier.
And if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with the instrument used for cutting hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is said to be that it should be cut, which no one should cut unless there is great necessity.
And this is the instrument to split it:
cut inside on the curve and not outside, and see here the form: And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines leap out, set them back in place according to their natural form in their proper location, if you can, for this is better.
When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the stomach, you must make the patient lie on their back and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part below the stomach, put the head and feet higher than the parts below, and likewise if the injury to the stomach is in one of the two parts, set your intention so that the injured part is higher than the other;
And thus you must manage as I say for both large and medium wounds.
In small wounds, apply what you have prepared, then hold between your hands a gentle minister who can touch the entire wound with his hand and bring the lips together;
And this is the common manner of sutures, and it is that you take one needle or several, according to the width of the wound, then leave two fingers' width from the head of the wound, and there insert a needle with a good strong thread. And pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the needle, which is beneath the skin within, so that you make it pierce from this side, and gather the three heads of the needle together;
Then draw a double thread around the needle on two sides, then gather the two heads of the wound similarly, and leave two fingers' width, and insert another needle there;
Then take the thread of the needle as you did for the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need the needles for, until all the wound is closed.
And let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick, because fine needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well. therefore they must be of medium size;
and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and widen the wound before sewing.
and then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not wound the patient while sleeping, and put a bandage or cloth over the heads of the needles to keep them still, and leave them until the wound is healed.
And this manner of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one or two needles are sufficient for it.
The second suture is common, and it is that you join the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the flesh together with one needle that has a strong middle thread.
And when you have pierced these four heads together, then bring the needle back to the part where you began, in the manner that one sews clothes.
And put a distance between each suture the thickness of a small finger.
This suture serves men, and I sutured a wound that a man had in the belly, which was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and two palms of intestines came out, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
I returned the intestines to him after they had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound was closed until fifteen days, and I cared for it, and he was cured.
And the doctors had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and placed on the wound old cotton II times a day, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Now I will tell you the II proper ways of stitching:
take the needle, and push it from the outside part to the inside.
when it has pierced the skin from right to left, leave the end of the thread where you pushed the needle in, and make it come out on the other side from the inside to the outside.
And the method of this stitch is such that you should sew as the furrier does with furs, and leave the end of the thread on one side, and pick it up on the other side, until the entire seam is completed.
The second method of stitching, which Galen specifically mentions, is done in such a way that some people join the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the thread to the other end, in this manner:
Insert a needle into the nearer end of the thread and make it pass through that place only, leaving the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it pass from the outer part to the inner one, at the two ends of the thread;
Then have one and the other pierced from the outer part to the inner, in two other places of the mirror that are on either side.
And this is the manner of stitching and the most common.
Galen said these words, and some testify that one should sew the belly with two needles, each with thread.
And one must insert one needle from one side and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts.
And know that when the perforation is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching is more difficult than in other places of the belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the fire has moved it, then put back the entrails, and the skin.
Then place on the wound a powder of healing herbs, and if the fire has moved it, then apply some ointment that is readily available until the wound heals. And stitch up the flesh, and let the skin and membrane be sewn together. Then treat the wound like the others until it is healed.
And if you do not have medicine, then apply, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For in many cases you do not need other medicines when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound may infect the main members, then you must soak a light linen cloth in temperate oil, or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits.
and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, which often happens, then give him a clyster of boiled wine, and do this also if the putrefaction reaches the intestines.
and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity in nature to nerves.
And if the entrails come out of the wound, then replace them like the intestines, as long as they are fresh.
And if the hair is grey or turned black, then you must tie the place that is dark, so that blood does not flow there, for there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is between the ligament, and place the two hooks hanging from the part below the wound until it is completely healed to facilitate extraction when the bone falls out, and the wound closes.
of the wound of the eye
When the intestines are cut and the wound is small, then one can restore it in some men, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, from which excrement and flatulence came out.
I cared for him as best as I could, and did not stop refining until he was healed, and the wound closed.
And when I saw it close, I feared that the patient might have an illness in his belly; and there was no illness there, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking.
and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in such a way: take broad-headed clamps, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the clamp has opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it tightens its mouth upon them;
and then cut off the head of the clamp, and this stays so that it cannot be loosened, then place another clamp after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely grasped; eben And treat the wound.
Those heads if they get stuck in the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, then one can tie off the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal, in such a manner:
take the head of this intestinal thread that is very thin, and then tie a fine twisted linen thread to the head of this thread, then pass the thread through the needle, and sew the intestines with it, and bring it back in the opposite direction;
and this manner of suturing is only for when there is hope.
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or cure, except for subtlety.
Of a fistula wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it is healed, is universally called a "fistula", and also when it bursts open again.
Et fistula est selon la verité, une nodule dure et blanche, où l'on ne ressent pas de douleur, et elle est aussi creuse qu'une plume d'oiseau.
Et parfois, elle apparaît sous forme de claire-voie, et d'autres fois, elle est épaisse. Parfois, elle se présente comme une poche, et d'autres fois, elle est suffisamment remplie.
Et je vous ai déjà parlé dans le chapitre sur les plaies, qu'une plaie qui ne guérit pas, et où il n'y a pas de chair, n'est ouverte que pour l'une des NEUF raisons: C'est-à-dire, à cause de la petitesse du sang ou de la chair. Or by its mischief; or because there is hard flesh inside it and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or if there is too much swelling; or if the place is rotten and the matter is of bad quality. or if the medicine is not good for healing; or because the decay is a kind of plague; or because of the property in the region, digestion and healing are slow, and it is naturally swollen. or if there are veins or bones involved.
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
And it is necessary for me to make you know the treatment of a fistula made by hand.
Know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the great veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if it comes to the property of the main member, and to similar places.
And all the fistulas that are of this type are of serious illness, and there is nothing except work and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have mentioned, and you are confident of the cure, and you recognize it, then take a tent of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, then seek it; xspace
And if the fistula is twisted, then seek a subtle tent of wood, for the wood bends easily around the twisting;
And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot easily seek it with tents, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture courses from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
Then seek it wisely to your ability, that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and it is cut deeply, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels at the pressing of your hand, and the place where he feels it;
And when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foulness and the corrupt flesh that is inside;
And then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deep from the right place, you must cut into it deeply, as much as you can, then put moist tents in theriac wine, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
And then put on bandages made of clean flesh, until it is healed;
And if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut into it.
If a vein or nerve troubles you in the principal members, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackening, then clean it until all the corruption is removed, then treat with things that promote healing until it is healthy;
And if it is not healed and the swelling returns as before, know that you have not reached the source.
If you expose and clean until you reach the bottom and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
And if it is healed in this way, that is good. If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; if there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature.
And if there is a small piece of bone that has decayed and you can extract it with pincers, then do so with an appropriate instrument, and if there are many pieces of bone, then extract all of them, leaving none behind.
And if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no mistake or fear, then cut away the flesh and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then apply a putrefying substance to the wound and allow it to decay around the bones, so that the bones may be more easily extracted.
And if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh bone, then wait for the corruption until all the blackness has been removed, then close the wound.
And if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches up to the marrow of the bone; then you must clean and cut away everything down to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
He was a young man about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open it.
But the doctors, through their foolishness, operated so much that they opened the abscess, and there flowed a lot of matter from it, and it became a fistula, and there came a lot of holes that all threw out pus and moisture from the body.
And many doctors tried to cure it for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine present, until I was called upon it, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being treated, and what flowed through the holes, a great amount. And the body of the youth turned red, and it had a citrine color.
I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and struck in one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupt and pierced, and the corruption reached inside the bone;
I believed that what appeared to me of the corrupt bone was all the corruption there was, except for what I removed;
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, but it could not heal;
and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and believed it, and then removed it, and took care to heal the place; But I could not do so much that I cut around a palm's width of the bone, and I pulled out the arrow with all its shaft, then I treated it with medicines. and he was quickly healed and cured, and there was no need to repeat the work except for the weakness of the patient who could not endure it, and for the fear of death that I had of him. Because of the evacuation, he often bled profusely, but he was completely cured, and in place of the bone, a hard flesh grew, which had a good constitution and did not cause any harm or opposition, neither while coming nor going.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: take a bandage and tie it around the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to extend it upwards; and put another bandage of thicker cloth than the first one around the flesh above the bone, and stretch out the end so that you pull the corrupted flesh away from below, and uncover the flesh in the place where you wish to tie, so that the thread does not injure the flesh; )))
And place a glowing coal under the bone to better burn the rotten flesh;
And it must be burned until the corruption can be seen and felt, and then it must be burned again.
And if the bone is corrupt, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then peel away all the flesh;
Then place a coal underneath, and then burn from one part to the other of the corruption, and let the burning be deep as the length of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then burn the corrupt joint, and burn the bone from the other side where it contains the corruption.
And if the corruption is between two joints, there is no other remedy than to burn.
and if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, then that thing is very strong; nevertheless, you must investigate this corruption, how it opens to you; and cleanse it in all the ways that you can, but let not the vein or nerve hinder you;
and know that the incisors and saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and delicacy, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of work its tool;
and know that the work will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases; If you consider the instrument you need according to what is required.
The head persists either because of internal causes or external ones;
and when you have treated that corruption with the remedies of medicines, and they do not help, then it is necessary to cover that member up to the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes by death or by the greater evil of the loss of the limb;
and the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burnt by fire, and persists after the blackening, then this corruption of the limb spreads from one member to another, and takes over the entire body; xspace
if you hasten to cover it, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous creatures, such as scorpions of the sea and vipers and similar ones, if the corruption is at the head of the arm, then cover it, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
And if it extends to the hand, then cut it at the joint, so that corruption does not spread to the arm.
and if it extends to the arm, then cut it with a knife;
and if it goes beyond the knife's edge, it is death, and there is no remedy outside of the amount of its power.
and do the same when corruption comes to the foot. if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the next joint.
and if it reaches the foot, then cut off the entire foot. and if it moves up the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other recourse than to leave the patient to die.
And the way to use the copper or silk member is that you bind it above and below, and have one assistant extend one of the ligatures downwards, and another the other ligature upwards, and you cut away the flesh that is between the two ligatures to a width of one thumb, until the bone is exposed;
Then take the copper or silk, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy area, and another infection or abscess will come to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs as you work, then cauterize the area immediately, or apply some powder that constricts;
Then return to your task until it is complete, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals.
And I will tell you that it happened to a man in his feet:
It happened to him that a blackness appeared on him as if it were a burn from fire, and this corrosion first came upon his big toe of the foot, so much so that it spread throughout the entire foot;
And when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was healthy.
And after a long time the corrosion returned to his thumb of the hand, and he came to me, and I put repercussive things on him after cleansing his body, but the corrosion could not cease.
And he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, for I had hope of expelling the material. And I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak;
and he became completely hopeless, returned to his land, covered his hand, and was healed.
And I have only told this account in order that others may do the same if they find it necessary.
Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy place and stays so long that it causes a large accumulation of pus; and then it breaks open and bursts, and the pus jumps out, leaving the place empty, like a vessel. and the skin on top is as thin as fine cloth, and it does not extend to the bone or the nerve. Such an illness is called "sinus" and is not called "fistula".
If it is so elongated that it reaches to the bone perfectly, then it is called "fistula".
And the skin is such that you should cut all around this skin, even when it is subtle, just like a piece of cloth; and it does not rot due to its corruption.
And if you think that the skin will rot and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a clyster in this manner:
check if the breast is large and the pus that comes out of it is foul-smelling, then give a clyster with Egyptian medicine made in this way: take equal parts of asphalt, oil, and litharge (lead oxide), and put them to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey;
And then take of this according to your need, and make it into a mixture with water and honey, and use it as an enema on the chest, and constrict the anus. And let the medicine stay in for two hours, then remove it by pressing out.
Do this many times until the chest is clean, and the pus is removed.
And sometimes use an enema of ashes water, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water over them, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know that the chest is well cleaned.
And if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the ashes water, then use an enema of water and honey in which there is a little powdered lead. or you cleanse it with honey and mixed wine, for the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the flesh dry;
and when you have done this, and are confident that the breast is well cleansed, then cleanse it with that which causes flesh to grow in it, which is to take a definite plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine;
or you cleanse it with some medicinal herbs and onions, of which I have spoken the properties in the treatment of onions;
and if the hole in the breast is small and the tube of the enema cannot enter, then widen it a little with an iron, and put inside a tent of Egyptian onion, or Basilicum onion, until it is widened;
And if the wound is too wide, then sew it and leave an opening only where the enema can enter; and if the aperture that the bladder makes is on top, then cut it off or to a lower place than it was.
And if you cannot cut the bladder as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bladder moves to the lowest place possible; for when the bladder is burst, do not allow any flesh to enter. And if you cannot cut the bladder as you see fit, then arrange it in such a manner: so that the bladder slides gently downwards, and leave nothing of the bladder there;
so that the bladder slides gently downwards, and leave nothing of the bladder there; And take consolidative medicines to apply to the wound, and extend on a linen cloth that covers all the wound; then press as firmly as possible around the hole in the vein with a larger cloth than the first, then apply soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it on the hole in the wound to lighten the weight, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days.
and the one that is on the hole in the vein, remove often to remove the weight, and know what comes out of the weight, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or undigestible;
and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this manner and you see what nature rises on the hole in the wound, know that the vein has already closed, and health approaches;
And then unbind it in the morning, or on the third day; and when you unbind the wound, change the bandage and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poisons pass after a long time, do not despair of health, for healing approaches.
For there are men in whom the flesh delays to heal in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
And if the undigested food rises from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach is not healthy.
And if the stomach delays in healing and is distant, apply drying moist substances with drying power, such as diaphoretic ointment, for it contains a large amount of vitriol, and that is the last medicine;
Take diaphoretic ointment and make it with rose oil and wash it with equal parts of old wine.
Then crush it and apply it;
And if the same substance is more swollen when cooked, and onion is not available, you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey while it is over the fire.
And then in a cloth bandage, and apply it to the breast, and sometimes administer a long cataplasm of lily roots, which is also like pea flour and celery. And make use of simple or compound [remedies]. Grind them, and make into a powder, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and apply it.
And if the wound is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption has gone deep and affects the bone, or the hard parts, or the tendons. Si the treatment of the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
Paronychia is an abscess that forms under the fingernail or toenail of the hand or foot, or occasionally it can form in other places;
and when it is neglected, and nothing is done about it, then an abscess like this forms, and it runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it can even reach all the way to the end.
and the corruption reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the toe is swollen, and the color is red.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
And if the nail presses into the flesh and begins to prick and wound it, then you must place the reed under the nail that points at the flesh, push it up, cut away that flesh delicately and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the rest of the flesh to remove everything; then heal with ointments until he is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and draw strongly, for as long as the corrupted bone remains there, it cannot heal.
And if you see the finger corrupting, cut it off at the first joint as was said before, then heal until it is healed.
And if it is pierced and swollen and there is great pain, then you must heal it first.
then cut the fingernail of the patient obliquely from above, and ensure that the cutting does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
and if it happens, place something on it to soothe [the pain].
The two bones that sometimes grow in the hands of some men are sometimes entirely fleshy, and sometimes there is bone, and occasionally there is a claw, and sometimes they grow at the root of the joint, or the growth is in some people’s fingers.
He who is born under the knuckle of the finger does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the finger, perhaps moves;
The cutting of the one who is fleshy is light in such a way: cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold back from cutting [it].
In one who is born or should at the anus, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for him, then cure him until he is healthy.
The union that comes to the two together comes by birth, or by union of a wound, or by cauterization with fire, or similar things.
Therefore, you must cut that suture, so that it may heal according to its natural forms; Then place between two tents or cloths soaked in rose oil, lest they stick together. or you can place between two thin sheets of lead until the place is soldered, as needed.
If suddenly one of his fingers comes with the palm, strike that suture as needed.
Veins are large wounds filled with superfluous melancholic substances that come in many parts of the body.
and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry than in others.
Therefore, you should administer to him some purging of bile, and then heal it with the holy basilicum.
The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one is that they are cut, and then one draws out the black blood with an iron. and the other method is that you lift the wound, and draw it all out with an iron.
The cut is done in this manner: the first rises with very hot vinegar so strongly that the large vein is made fine, then hold the patient's leg from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;
then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a wide incision, then raise and pull strongly to draw out the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength can bear;
and then bandage it, and instruct him to eat foods that produce black bile.
and renew the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full again, and benefit the patient.
The elevation of it is according to this manner: take the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in the bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and swell the veins;
and if you do not have a bath, then warm it at the fire, and then cut towards the vein along the thigh to the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then peel back the skin, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched;
and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord; xspace
Then push the hair under, so that it is raised from the skin, and then attach it lightly with a needle, then cut it in another place above three fingers;
Then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with a razor, as you have done, and attach it to another needle, as you did before;
Then cut another shape, or several if you need them, then lift it and cut at the finger of the foot, then draw and lift until the second shape;
Then draw it from shape to shape until it comes out completely, then cut it.
And if you cannot draw and lift it, then insert a very strong needle with a double thread, and tie and draw it, and push it under the hair, and turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out. And be careful that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot draw or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
And when you have drawn it all out, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound. And tend to it until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and wrapped together and is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it carefully, but do not cut it. And draw it out as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron used to cut the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein.
And it is of thick curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said. And here is its form.
This vein is engorged in legs, in hot places where no grass or tree grows, and in land where there is no moisture.
and by chance it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes under the skin, just as snakes and worms appear within the body, engorged between the skin and flesh.
And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is such that a very great inflammation comes into the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to emerge like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder dislocates, you should wrap around it a piece of linen from one and a half to two and a half cubits, and knot it, and let the linen hang on the leg, and every time it comes out due to weakness, wrap it again with the linen and knot.
And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut near the base until all of it has come out. because if you cut it, then it enters into the flesh, and brings forth an abscess and pus in that place, and causes a severe illness;
for which reason it must be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain in the body;
and sometimes this vein when it is treated with five or ten palms in length, and a man came to me whose vein was ten palms long, and when you cut it, then one or two ribs or openings burst forth, and it goes through until the end, so that everything comes out;
and let the matter inside be emptied, and apply to the place medicines that prevent pus every day, then treat it as you would with abscesses.
And sometimes at this vein there are fewer waters, and especially when it opens in the foot's joint or in the foot, and there comes much water from it, and because of which it becomes rare;
then heal it as we have said before.
worms that are born between skin and flesh This illness is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often happens to cattle. It is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and goes through the whole body ascending and descending, and one feels it well when moving from member to member, until it tears the skin where it goes, and jumps out;
And it is infected by the corruption of some humors, like worms and snakes and leeches and roundworms in the belly;
And one fears its harmfulness, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye. And this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and drawn out, one cannot go too far until it has gone away:
then you must bind the place above and below with a strong tie very tightly, then cut on top and pull out strongly, and if the pus is deep in the flesh and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
And the greatest harm that it does is to blind the eye, as we have said.
And if you see it coming toward the head near the eye, tightly bind under it the eyelid, then cut on top and pull out strongly.
and it is necessary to use the patient for body cleansing with soluble medications for bad humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
from the pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called in our land "vakirir," and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member;
and I saw this happen as I tell you. I was called to an ill woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it rise like a worm on her shoulder, faster than anything else, as if it were alive silver when it runs from one place to another;
the pain left that place and inserted itself in the shoulder, and then a little later it ran throughout the body, until it came to the other arm;  ?> li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;
Then she told me that she was always turning around the body, as I saw her.
Je me demande beaucoup comment elle change ainsi d'un membre à l'autre, car je n'avais jamais vu cette maladie se manifester de cette façon auparavant. However, I had seen many who well had wanted to move pain from one place to another, but I did not see it as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and open veins, and therefore appeared this forced windiness.
And they did not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and filled veins.
And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then strike quickly above and below, and then cut until that forced windiness comes out of its place; And cauterize the place;
and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those that expel flatulence, such as foul-smelling pills, and mugwort pills, and similar others.
Les flèches sont variées, selon leurs apparences et selon les endroits du corps où elles atterrissent.
The differences in their kind is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and hooked, and welded. and of those which have two prongs, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are parts;
and if it falls into any member, it falls in two ways: or in a principal member, such as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestine, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterward appear to you. you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many ways; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then remove it, and treat the wound.
And the signs of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the sutures that are above the brain, are: scotoma, drowsiness, faintness, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm, confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; And perhaps it is without force of the nostrils or the ears; and perhaps he loses his speech and voice; and from the wound comes white moisture resembling pus, and it leaps out like flesh broth.
And if these signs appear to you, then take care of the cure, and draw out the arrow if it is there.
The signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. And perhaps the arrow moves as if it were pus, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting. Know then without doubt that death follows.
And the sign of the arrowhead that never comes out without foam or bubbles from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the cover of the foot, it is near the small ribs; and it causes great pain and suffering. And it moves all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps something undigested comes out of the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and some feces come out through the rectum, then there is no hope for a cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine leaps out and flows away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulders and arms and spine of the back and chest and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to many conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man, an arrow fell into the arm in the root of the nose: I extracted it and drew it out from another side beneath the fat of the ear, and he was healed without injury.
And he drew an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the skin, and the arrow was bent, and he could only reach its tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, with all the iron very light without ears.
The game was completed, and no bad incident happened to him.
And he drew an arrow from his throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic in nature:
I shaved my beard, and acted subtly until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I drew an arrow from a man into whose belly it had fallen, and thought that he would die;
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change at all. I cut into the arrow, extracted it with force, and he had no bad incident.
And then I saw a man onto whom an arrow fell on his back, and the wound was closed over;
And the arrow remained within him, and did not change its natural disposition in any way, nor was it disturbed in any of its natural functions.
And he saw another man, into whose face an arrow fell and the wound closed up; and he remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many other similar ones.
And one threw an arrow at a man of the king's nobles, which had fallen into his nose, and was leaning slightly to the right side; abei and the arrow was completely lodged.
I was called to treat it after it had fallen for three days. Si je trouve la plaie très étroite.
I touched it all over with a subtle probe, and felt nothing; And he felt a stabbing pain under his right ear.
I thought it was the tip of an arrow, I applied a poultice that is attractive and digestive on the spot, so that the place would not swell. And I saw the place where the arrow had entered.
And I saw the place where the arrow had entered. I applied the poultice for several days, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose;
And he told me so. I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open, and then I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow which had turned in place;
Then I inserted into the opening of the wound using that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared clearly;
And it exceeded the limit by three months, and then the wound healed so much that when I put the pincers in, I could not pull out [the arrowhead] from either side.
Then I did not stop trying and contriving various instruments until I got it with well-made pincers, as will be described at the end of this chapter, so that I pulled it out and the wound healed.
And physicians judge that the nasal septum cannot be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or I have told you the nature of extracting certain arrows, so that you may apply your care to what I do not say, for the book cannot comprehend everything.
but the wise master comprehends very little and only what is present and failing; he finds nine works and nine instruments in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows should not be removed from the members into which they are inserted except in two ways: or through the place where they entered, or through another part;
and that which should come out from where it entered is an arrow entering fleshy places, and sometimes now.
And if it does not jump now, let it remain until the flesh is rotten around, and the exit be cleared.
And similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it remain thus for several days, and move it each day.
And then it will jump out, and if it does not, pierce all around with the finest needle until the place is enlarged, and then draw it out.
And if the arrowhead has returned to its place in the body and cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the entire area. and if you feel it, then draw it out with some suitable instrument;
and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrowhead, and there are no bones, nerves or veins, then widen it until the wound is large.
and draw out the arrowhead if you can, and if there are barbs on the arrowhead that hold it in place, then cut away the flesh from two sides as much as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrowhead until you can draw it out.
And handle it carefully so that you do not break the arrow, which would wound more severely.
And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the place around is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easy. And if the flow of blood seems contrary to you, then proceed as we have said in the chapter on treatment;
And beware of cutting the nerve or vein, and devise a way how you may draw out the arrow safely, whether early or late, strongly or gently;
And put the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest help there can be; and if you cannot do this, then place him according to the signs that show you how.
An arrow that comes from another place, or where it protrudes something from it, or the skin is swollen there so that one sees or feels it clearly: 
Cut it off, so that the pincers can take hold of it, and then extract it. If it jumps out now.
And if it is stuck in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then remove it.
And if she cannot come out, leave her there and then begin the extraction again until she comes out;
And if part of the arrow is still in there, push it all the way to the shaft.
And if the shaft has broken off, and you see that a push will be necessary, then use an instrument with a notch, so that the arrowhead fits into the notch of the instrument.
And then push hard, and if the arrow is splintered, push in an instrument with a pointed end to ease extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, you must cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
And if an arrow falls into the belly or the stomach or the bladder or the side, and it is close to the surface, and you can reach it with a knife, then cut.
And take care not to cut the vein or the nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound if necessary. And treat until it heals.
The shape of the pincers used to remove arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and here is its shape:
And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead tip is like the feather of a bird, to pierce the point of the arrow, as shown here in this shape:
There are XXXI wounds from which one can heal, of which there are sixteen in the head, namely: Two hollows located after the ears, called the "two herbaceous". And the two arteries which are in the two temples of the head. And two veins that are in the two eyelids, which are called "aspirers". And the vein that is on the forehead. And the vein that is at the tip of the nose. And the two windpipes which are in the neck. And the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augerich". And two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is from the left side, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; And the remedy is called "fennel," and it is composed of celery and basil, and the common people call it "vein of the heart. And the basil is in the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is on the fascia, and it is that one by which one heals, which clearly appears on the wrist.
And the savatelle is the vein between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
And in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the crook of the left wrist, and the second sophone is at the ankle of the right side. And the vein which is called "nesse," that is in the ankle of the other side;
And in the other leg there are three veins beneath these.
The opening of the veins which are after the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
And the quality of the opening is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; Then the patient should squeeze his neck with one hand, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two hanging places from the head: Cut them then with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, press firmly;
Then take the lancet, and push it under the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along with the entire vein, and cut both the skin and the vein well into two parts, and make the blood come out as much as you see.
Then hold it tight and bind it until it is healed.
And I have already spoken of the incision and the cautery in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for chronic migraine, and inflammation, and chronic glaucoma, and for acute tears of the eyes.
And the quality of the bleeding is as I have said: And it is that the patient should hold his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly. And feel your thumb under your toe, then signify so.
then lift the curved needle above the vein at your toe's tip, and insert the lancet below, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done with two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
then unbind the patient, and place your toe on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it. and then bandage it firmly, and leave it until it heals.
and we have already spoken about their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
The bleeding from the vein of the forehead is as valuable as the bleeding from the cephalic for ancient facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness.
And the quality is such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting it until the vein appears. then take the instrument called "fosseur", of which here is the shape:
And place the tip on the vein, and strike with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you wish. then release the patient's neck and bind the vein until it is healed and sometimes work with a wide flame.
However, it should not be that the flame is too sharp; and heal obliquely, for the bone is close by, and perhaps breaks the flame when it is delicate.
The bleeding of the two veins that are in the two temples helps with the eyes, and with alopecia, and with redness, and with the little vein in the eye, and with diseases of the face.
And the quality of their bleeding is such that the patient should tighten his neck by twisting some rope, as before.
Then let it bleed, and the bleeding should be from a hole, a little long rather than wide, because there is no flesh there. And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it will break.
Then make the blood flow as much as you need, and then tie it with a cotton cloth, and bind it well.
The bleeding of the nose vein is good for fever, and for madness, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that occurs in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient strains his neck, then presses his nose against your left hand, and takes the fine long flame, and inserts it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow.
And do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your needs, then bind it for one night, because it is quickly restored.
The bleeding of the two jugulars helps with the narrowing of the vein, and with the beginning of leprosy, and with many illnesses, and with pustules, and with ulcers, and with shingles.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should stretch his neck under one and the other, as we have said.
And let the master be standing over the patient's head, and the patient sit on a stool. Then open the vein along its length widely, then draw blood gently or as much as is needed;
Then do the same on the other vein, then untie the bandage, and stretch all the veins moderately so that the patient does not choke. And leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
of liver bleeding The bleeding from the wounds of the lips above thus helps to heal in the mouth, and causes decay of the gums, and splitting of the lips, and of the nose and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting is to make the patient sit in front of you and stretch his neck as I have said. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is in the right lip and the other in the left, and they are recognized by being black, and because around them there are small black veins.
So cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them or are in doubt, then cut the thicker one from each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
Of the wound beneath the tongue The bleeding of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the bleeding of the cephalic (vein), and it is for the constriction of the throat, and for the diseases of the eye, and for the diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of the sick person is such that he lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he raises his tongue, and looks down on each side a black vein.
Heal one and the other, and do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the knife with which one commonly heals are healed in two ways:
either by piercing with all the flame of a large mirror or an olive-shaped subtle knife, and it is called "anaesil"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the burning ember is very famous, and it is wide as you see.
And it is necessary to open the swollen veins that are full of thick and visible blood, which contain large and turbid blood; And this is the form of the olive oil flame
And it is more finely pointed, and is for healing fine veins, where there is fine citrine blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps against diseases under the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
And it is necessary for the physician to draw wisely, and to guard against the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery, and blood comes out, then he must cauterize it, as I have said. And the flame should not be pricking, but cutting like a lancet.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, then you must constrict it and seek another one; Or where you wish to take some blood from him, or you heal in his place the vein within the arm: it opens clearly; and clamp with the flame cautery, as we have said.
And if you wish to know the place of the vein, then first you must stretch the arm so that you touch the place until you feel the pulse. then mark the place with a cross, and then tie the arm, and clamp the vein with the flame cautery. and beware not to strike an artery when you see the place swelling, for it is from the artery: avoid it then.
And if you see it spurt out like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery. hurry then, and place your finger firmly, then remove your finger if it is stained with blood, for this often happens. if the arm moves, let it be, and do not move it yourself, the patient.
and act cautiously, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the blood is not stained, and it flows away from you, and the doctor is not present, cut the artery if it is open, for the head of the vein will retract. and staunch the blood.
And take a piece of fig bark, and split it, and take one half and bind it firmly until the next day.
if the blood is staunched, that is good; If not, then treat it with powders that stop bleeding;
And the treatment is not suitable in many conditions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The bleeding from the middle of the vein is such that it draws blood from above and below, because it is composed of the basilic vein and the cephalic vein, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the bleeder to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he goes too deep, and finds the nerve, and it swells, and the healing is not suitable, and perhaps it cannot heal;
And this nerve often opens up, and if it does not open in some men due to its subtlety, then you must cauterize it with the instrument called "anesil"; And let the nerve slip away as best you can.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
The vein of the cephalic also helps, as it draws blood from the head, and it helps with the eyes;
and it is necessary to cut deep into the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because that is the safest of all the veins, because there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it. Nevertheless, one should seek the lightest place, and do not worry if one misses the first time, and start again; and perhaps the spot swells for some men when one misses the first time, but it does not matter.
The quality of the bleeding depends on your opinion.
The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that bloodletting is practiced only to maintain health and to avoid future illnesses;
And let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are in the hand: that is to say, cephalic, fast, and basilic. and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear.
and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
The bloodletting that is used for illnesses has no fixed hour, but rather whenever needed during the day or night, at all hours and at all times.
And it is not appropriate to bleed children until fourteen years of age, nor women who are pregnant beyond the fourth month up to the seventh month. Nor should the old who have passed sixty years be bled.
And when someone wants to heal, in whatever manner it may be, he must cleanse the intestines with a light enema if he has retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines the harmful superfluities into the principal members.
nor does he heal who is too full of food, or drunk, while still inebriated, or who are dropsical.
and if one attempts to heal after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, multiple miscarriages in women, labor, vigil, fasting, or anything that entirely diminishes the strength of a person by a weapon or disease.
then refine the humors if the blood is thick with foods and drinks and medicines if you have the means.
then enter into the bath, if nothing prevents you, to make the blood thin, and heal from the wound of the foot around the third part, as we have said;
and guard yourself that day against work, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
and be happy and joyful, and let the bandages be higher than those of one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then draw the ligature moderately tight, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow;
and then rub the area with the hands, so that the veins swell and are felt;
then moisten the bandages with a little old oil, then place his left hand’s finger on that vein beneath the area where he wishes to heal, so that the vein does not flee and evade at the time of healing.
Car there are veins that bleed like strings for the bowyer, and there are some filled with windiness, so that when one applies fire, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is in such a state. And if he opens the vein, the wound is too tight, therefore it is necessary that the bowyer be knowledgeable in these matters.
And if the vein opens on the first attempt, it is good; If not, then he should try again a little lower or higher in haste, unless the place is swollen.
And if the place is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him wait for one day or two, and do not tie the arm. by chance such abscesses may occur
do not enter a bath, then resume the bleeding if it pleases him;
and if the orifice is small, or the blood flows subtly, and you doubt that not as much blood will come out as you wish, then thrust into this same orifice all the flame straightaway;
and perform it a little hastily, before the place swells; for this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not begin the bleeding again, and put a little bit of oil on it, for it lightens the body of blood, and in this place the oil is better than oil;
And thus administer the juice of oil into each wound that you open the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
And this same act as a poultice and boil of them, when one places it on the wound. If it refines the blood and separates when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not opened strongly except for that time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and place on the wound a sponge moistened in water and in salt a little hot, and hold it for an hour;
And you must do this after the discharge of blood from the vein, and if there remains on the wound after some days any blackness or greenness, it will not harm him. And if you see, put on some substance of aloe or myrrh mixed in calamint juice, mustard, or something similar.
And often there is an abscess and appearance at the base of the skull:
put your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft to the touch of the hand, then that appearance is bad. Therefore do not put on it any substance of what we have said, for perhaps it is bursting from the artery;
but make a dry poultice to harden the spot, then heal it with another treatment until it is healed.
And draw out some of the blood according to its quantity and power, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it issue until it becomes red; And if you see it swollen, let it be until it is drained; And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And he who is full and strong, and needs bloodletting, should have a larger wound made, and the flame should be wide.
And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed often and frequently, and he should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from excessive blood loss and nerve damage, and it is better than the long or wide incisions for bleeding.
And to him whose body lacks strength for bloodletting, it is necessary to give moistened bread in apple juice. If he is heated, draw blood three times or four, and if he has a cold constitution, let him chew bread soaked in syrup of muscadine, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if he faints from blood loss, after losing much blood, it is necessary that he drink broth made of meat, and a subtle, fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to drain his arm and bleed another time, it is necessary, when he is weakened by great blood loss, that he bleed little by little, according to the amount of his strength continuously.
And if he wants to drain his arm after the first blood letting and he has a strong body, then let him bleed seven hours after the first blood letting, or in the ninth hour.
And whoever wishes to heal from another place, must be healed on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and causes fever; then one must draw out a large quantity of it, and widen the opening until it reaches as far as possible. after you have observed all the conditions of bloodletting, and place your hand over his pulse when he is bleeding, so that death does not occur in place of healing, and this often happens when the bleeder is negligent;
And it is not necessary when you see to dislocate the arm and cause blood to flow a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press very hard; or if it is crooked, let him extend the arm quickly, for this would be bad;
but leave it until it heals a second time; or you press at the tip with the flame until the frozen blood that has gathered in the wound flows out, and place on it a little cloth soaked in water and press lightly on top.
Et s'il est enfle, laissez-le et ne le serrez pas, jusqu'à ce que l'inflammation soit calmée.
And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, then heal it in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healed in the place of the head's vein because it is composed.
And the manner of healing is such that the patient plunges his hand into hot water until the flesh is red;
then it should be moderately bound so that the wound appears well, then let it heal now across, not wide or long; xspace
And let the opening be wide, and let it be cauterized close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into the water until you have enough;
And if it is in summer, do not put the hand in hot water, for one puts it more in winter than in summer;
And the cautery of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are neither artery nor nerve in it.
The cautery of the little vein of the right hand is effective against all liver diseases, and this is how it is done:
Hold the hand firmly and put it in hot water until the vein swells up, if one can see it; And if the wound is at an angle, and you cut it completely through, then it does not matter.
And do not go too deep, for the nerves are all bare of flesh beneath, and then place the hand in hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile and seil por souder hastanment, and ensi fai de chescun rain.
The wound on his left hand is equivalent to the illness of leprosy, and it does all the same as I have told you concerning the right.
The wound on the shin is equivalent to all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of flowers, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the thighs and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of his wound is such that the patient should place his foot in hot water, and rub on the wound until it bursts, and bind it above the ankle. And the wound is at the ankle, and there are many veins that run upward from the foot;
Cut it then in the widest vein, or at the ankle, whatever is best.
And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath, and make the incision across like in cupping;
and let the flame be gentle.
And if the pus cannot come out, put the foot back in water, and allow the wound to drain well.
And if the incision fails the first time, then start again a little higher on the second attempt, for the place is salty;
nor should you doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the saphena of the other foot likewise.
The place of the sciatic wound is on the ankle bone, and its healing is worth against hip pain, when it is for hot blood.
And the characteristic of its incision is that the patient enters the bath, and draws over the ankle four fingers in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
and if it opens, then incise it in all the ways that you can, and across. And it is better for you to cut it off, because the place is open, and it is very painful in many men.
And it is better for you to cut it off, because the place is open, and it is very painful in many men. And if you cannot find it, then cut off some of the flesh that is open on the back of the foot, towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
And make the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and bind it; She is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or bronze, or glass;
And cupping is done in two ways: Either by drawing blood or without drawing blood.
And this cupping which is done without drawing blood is done in two ways: Or she is all fire, or without fire;
and venesection which is done by cutting and extracting blood is done in fourteen places of the body, one of which is completely on top of the head; and the other is in the neck; and two others in both sides of the neck; and the cupping glass under the chin; and the cupping glasses on both shoulders; and the cupping glasses on the buttocks; and the cupping glasses in both arms; and the cupping glasses on both legs; and the cupping glasses on both ankles; xspace
and the venesection does not draw blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not weaken anyone at all, as is done with bloodletting from a vein; And it is not necessary that she be purged, by any fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
And if because of illnesses it is necessary to bleed or by custom, then we administer (it) each hour at the beginning of the month, in the middle and in every time;
for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and on the neck, and darkness to the eyes;
and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; And there are some who dream of blood and wounds and death and such things.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we instruct them to venesect after three hours of the day.
The sinus of the nose also helps against the coldness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary for this to be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is in place of the sinus of the head, and it is not necessary for those who are of cold temperament to use it, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm;
And therefore it is not necessary for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
And those who bleed often from it become foolish, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower because of the fear of folly.
The ventilation in the neck is in place of the sinus of the head and basilica, and therefore it is useful for the constriction of the bladder, and for the rupture of the urinary canal of the scrotum, and for stone, and for retention;
And there you should put a little, for if it holds too firmly, it causes obstruction of the stomach and heart.
The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are good for headaches, and migraines, and strangulation, and toothache, and it is in the place of the basilica's venesection.
And you should instruct the bloodletter to press his hand well, so that he does not cut the artery and cause an uncontrollable flow of blood.
The ventosations under the chin are good for mouth diseases, and for rotting of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; And it is in the place of the venesection of the two lips.
The ventosations of the shoulders are good for illnesses caused by heat and fullness.
The punctures of the ribs are worth as much as three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from those large veins.
and instruct the physician not to strike too deeply into the flesh, because the place is bare of meat, and beneath are nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is on the buttocks is worth against hemorrhoids of the anus, and against diseases below, and it must be large, and made of bronze, so that it can draw well. and perhaps, if it were delicate, it would break. and it makes large wounds.
The cupping glasses on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the entire body, and are worth against old pains of the kidneys, and of the spleen, and of the bladder, and remove flows.
And they are in the place of two spleens and two ankles, however they weaken the body after long use, and bring paralysis in many ways.
The manner of placing the cupping glass is to first place it empty, and suck quickly, and put it on hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood;
then burn, and put on the cupping glasses again, and take care according to the condition of the body, for there are some who have dark flesh and clear pores; so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a deep cut. And suck lightly.
And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: The first time to clear the path of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time;
and when we want to draw the blood little by little, we need only one strike. And if we want a lot of blood, then we must do it often;
and if the blood is thick, strike deeply, and the end result should be that the heart is pierced suddenly, and those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, must anoint the places of the cups with opening and dissolving oil. If it is inflamed, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
And if it is swollen, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
And if the superfluidities are thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
And if the one being healed has tender flesh and large pores, oil must not be applied there, but it should be washed afterwards with rose water, or cold water, or mallow water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar water.
And the one with much moisture should be treated with ease, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluous fluids should drink old wine, or the water of swine, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things.
and it is not appropriate to use a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
And do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that one wash, both before and after being cupped.
And watch out if the patient is choleric, and if his blood is too sharp and inflamed; then he should take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in vinegar, and similar things; and minced partridges, and roasted meat, and moist dishes.
and minced partridges, and roasted meat, and moist dishes. And the one who has a cold temperament should take syrup of honey, and wine that is moderately fragrant, between old and new, and minced peas, and minced partridges and small birds and thrushes;
and on the day he bleeds himself, he should drink more than eat.
and it is necessary to give some men sometimes a tricacle or musk before bleeding, or after, to strengthen the main limbs. And let the blood be drained, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The cupping glasses that are placed without puncturing are those placed on the liver, and the bladder, and gout, and on the belly and the breast and the kidneys and the hip, for these members do not allow puncturing, and one does this only to attract blood from one member to another, as we do on the breasts when the nipples bleed;
To remove the thickness that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and the breast to reduce the member;
And removes the pain when there is a swelling or stone, and by its attractive power perhaps removes the swelling, or moves the stone from its place.
And so it does when placed on the liver and bladder when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only that. And sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in pleurisy, and in such a manner that one fills the cupping glass only with hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The form of the cupping glass administered by fire is as follows:
And it should be two fingers wide and half a palm deep, and on the side around the middle there should be a small hole, like for inserting a needle, and it should be made of bronze, softened beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb.
And let there be in the middle a rod of cross sectional area made of brass or iron, to place a compress there, and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who use them.
for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
And one should thus place this cupping glass on the member:
grasp the compress of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping glass across the rod that is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the member, and your two fingers should be on the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wishes, the steam escapes, and remove the cupping glass.
And use linen as before, and often repeat it if needed.
In the cupping glass which is used for pleurisy, there is no rod or hole, and it is only prepared when full of water, and it is placed on the member alone;
and this is its shape:
Leaches are only prepared when they are to be placed in members where a cupping glass cannot be used because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places; And in fleshless places, such as fingers or noses, and other similar places;
And the quality of using them is that when you find leeches that are in clean fresh water without any stench, take them;
And he puts them in a vessel of fresh water, until they become accustomed to it, and have nothing in their bellies. And then let them be bled by venesection and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and apply leeches.
And when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where a cupping glass can be applied, he should apply one, for this is very effective afterwards.
If not, then raise the place with a poultice of barley and then with water, very well, and then bandage it.
And if the place bleeds too much after the removal of the leeches, then soak a linen cloth in cold water and apply it until the bleeding stops.
And if the blood is increased, then apply ground vitriol or gallnuts and similar things until it is dried out.
Or take half of the peeled beans and place them on the spot, leaving them until they dry out in place, this will stop the bleeding now.
And if you need more, then take other leeches.
And if the leeches do not want to attach, then rub the spot with fresh blood, or insert a needle until the blood comes out, and then place them on, and as soon as they sense the blood, they will attach.
And when you see that they are falling off, then sprinkle on a little powder of ground aloe and gum, or ashes, and they will fall off now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.
It is necessary therefore that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of the words and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or splintering occurs in someone, then you must hasten to heal the patient from one side and the other, if anything hinders you completely, such as physical weakness, or childhood, or old age. Or if the time is not very hot, or too cold;
And avoid cold food, that is to say cold soups, and bird meat and rabbit, and do not drink wine, nor eat fatty foods, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or swelling in the limb.
If the patient returns to his previous diet.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote thickening, such as wheat cooked in water, rice, heads (of animals), feet, calf's foot, eggs, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment the bones heal more quickly and sooner.
And know that broken bones of the old and decayed cannot be well taken or healed according to their nature due to the dryness of the members, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
but do not worry, reset on top of the broken bone with strong clamps that hold and join the member together, until it is reinforced as it was before; and do not completely hinder its work, and for this reason it must be fed with coarse foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses en maintes manieres.
Because the fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. Because there is a fracture that goes to the bone marrow, and another in slicing, as when cutting a feather for writing.
Because there is a fracture that goes to the bone marrow, and another in slicing, as when cutting a feather for writing. And there is a fracture with wound, and a fracture which is just a small crack all around.
And each kind should have its own device and proper tool for the restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place;
and it is known that the break of the bone occurs because the place is twisted, and it swells well on the outside, and resounds when pressed with the hand;
And when there is no fracture or breakage, and the patient does not feel great pain.
But he may well have a dislocation, or a split, or a small break. If you must not move it by hand, but apply the following medications, and then delicately secure it now.
And know that the breaks that go in the direction of length, and the two parts are separated, it is necessary to now set them equally, before an abscess forms there.
And if an abscess forms there, then leave it alone for some days, until the abscess is reduced.
Then align it equally with a screw that you can easily and wisely place, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of those where there are splinters.
Then he holds it, as will be explained later.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, extend it with two parts, if it is hand or foot, or hold it with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset all the additions in their places as much as you can, and be careful not to cause the patient injury or pain with your work.
and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well with your hand if you think it is not well enough: ‌
Si tu alignez bien la dresche, et ne la serrez pas trop fort, ni ne pressez pas comme font ceux qui causent par leur travail un abcès chaud et une contraction du membre, comme nous l'avons observé de nombreuses fois.
Et lorsque le membre est prêt, instruis bien le patient de ne pas le bouger, ni en éveil, ni en sommeil, ni en tournant ou d'une autre manière. Et veille à ce que le membre soit si solidement fixé qu'il ne ressente aucune douleur. Car lorsqu'il ressent de la douleur, ce n'est pas suffisant, et il faut le placer dans une position où il ne ressent aucune douleur.
Et veille à ce que le membre soit si solidement fixé qu'il ne ressente aucune douleur. Car lorsqu'il ressent de la douleur, ce n'est pas suffisant, et il faut le placer dans une position où il ne ressent aucune douleur. And take care that it is set straight, so that deformity does not occur when it is reset.
And the quality of the broken member is as I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and largeness and in form.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers and similar ones: so it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloths; And those that are large, such as hips and legs: ️
So it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire large member and holds it evenly on all sides, so that there is no gap.
Then place light wadding around it, three or four turns according to the member, and tighten your hand a little all over the bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break is moved away from the break.
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy place, then take the other ligament, and turn it back again on the broken place;
then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first turn above;
then put between the ligaments linen swabs or cloths, until it is all even, then bind everything above with the bandage, and then place your splints well on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, put on something that eases the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days;
then brace above your shoulders, and let them be half the width of a large cane, made wisely, or from wood used to make clefts, or from palm leaves, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the brace placed above the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
and let it also be as long as needed for the member, whether small or large. then brace above the braces as you did at first, then bind on top with a bandage, as in the first ligature over the fracture; tighter is underneath, gradually less so.
and it is necessary that the bandages be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
because if the threads are thick, as I have seen the work of fools who make their laces from twisted flax cords, and this is a great mistake, for the lace cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have between each star less than two fingers' width.
And if the patient is wounded by the tips of the stars after being drawn into healthy places, put underneath them wool or cloth scraps so that he does not bleed.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe its treatment next.
And know that it is not appropriate to draw out all the stars from broken limbs on the first day. Because when the limb is large, it should not be put in stars larger than five or seven days, or more according to your security of the resulting abscess;
and see here the manner of old plasters for the restoration of breaks, dislocations, and twists:
and it is that you take flour that stays on the mill walls, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this preparation, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring breaks in many ways, especially for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold. ︎
Another method of plaster for mending fractures, dislocations, and twists. Take aloe, ladanum, elecampane, asafoetida, gum arabic, and musk, in the amount of ten. Myrrh and aloes, in the amount of five. Garlic, seven. Grind them into powder, and mix with egg white. If the man's temperament is hot, then use this plaster, for it has a good composition and quickly mends broken bones, and is valuable to many men.
Another method of plaster for twists: Take musk and marshmallow, in the amount of ten. Mirror and aloe, nine parts each. Acaice, six parts; Bolic Armenian, ten parts; and grind well, and mix with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Another method for emplaster on dislocated joints and displaced bones, and soothes the resulting pain, and heals bone fractures and breaks: Take new wool, and moisten it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place on the affected area.
This emplaster does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and properly removes pain.
Another method of emplaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and wild pansy leaves, and grind them together, and make an emplaster.
Another method of emplaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to soften the remaining abscess. Take root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, chickpea flour, one part each.
And grind them together, and make an infusion with wine, and if the limb is hot, make the infusion with moist coriander water or plain water, and apply it.
Another method of plaster that is stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to restore the limb. Take roots of mallow, and seeds of flax, borage, melilot, and woodruff, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts. And grind them together, and make an infusion with salt water or fresh water or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its condition.
Ypocras says in his book that one should not place anything on a broken member to restore strength except for a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen says one should place on a broken member, to restore it, dry things that are slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and frankincense, and similar things, as we have said.
Another plaster for injury and pain: Take mallow and clipped men's hair, or bird feathers, and marshmallow, and salt equally, and crush them, and make a poultice and apply it.
Then, after that, loosen the poultice a bit, and check if the patient feels any pain, or if the bone has moved from its place; If not, then do not remove it for several days. And if pain comes to the area, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry and remove it, and take away the poultice now.
And take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the area, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. Then let the member rest for an hour, then place on a dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind onto a knot, until you are certain of a hot abscess.
and the inflammation of the member will rest, and the pain will be removed. Then begin again with a subtle binding, and a little poultice, and do not tighten it as much as before; and make it subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, I have removed it all, and you need a plaster and a bandage, then start it again, as you did first equally.
And if nothing happens to the member as we have said, do not unbind it until after three days or four or five or seven. and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the fracture sets, and the connection of the flesh approaches.
Then you constrain it more than before, and you increase its flesh, as I have said earlier.
And if you see the place becoming drier than necessary, know that nutrition cannot come there; Therefore, apply warm water dressing every time you dislocate it, which should be done every three days, and release the bandage a little;
By this work, then, nutrition comes to the limb, and quickly heals like what foolish doctors do, who return the twisted limb.
This is bad, and it is a fearful work, and I see no other remedy than to leave it alone and to set it right.
There are many types of breaks, and diverse shapes, and the causes are different;
for it has breaks that are made by the strike of a sword, and the neck removes all the bone up to the marrow which is below the bone, as an axe or stick does; and therefore this manner of break is called "haichure".
where the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, and this manner of break is called "absolue";
and the wound from these two breaks is large or small.
And if there is an embedded strike, or a split from the blow of a stone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar things.
And if there is a breaking wound, which reaches up to the skin beneath the bone or on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
And there is a wound that is confined within the bone as fine as a hair, and the fracture is small, therefore this break is called "capillary". 》
and there is the wound that is made either by striking with a stone or by falling or something similar, which causes a fragment of bone to enter inside, and the place is swollen as blacksmiths do when they strike on cauldrons; 》 If between the stones inside.
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in the head, as in a child's head;
and it happens with all these types of breaks where small fragments are separated like stars; and I will speak about it in its place.
And we recognize all kinds of fractures by their retraction on them, and the examination with tensors, and by the corrupt flesh that is upon it.
The similarity to hair is known because when the bone is exposed and rubbed with it, the black fracture appears.
In the treatment of fractures, pay attention to the patient's accidents, and if you see any evil accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of understanding, distension, pallor, fever, and eyes coming out strong and red, and other similar things in many dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a frightening accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded person comes first to you, and this is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day.
And if this is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone is not corrupted and the complications that we have mentioned do not occur.
And if the bone break reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the split part like this:
and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound as gently as you can, and if blood runs when uncovering the bone or an abscess like this, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil; And make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be assured of the stoppage of blood; Then begin to remove around the bone, and this is done according to two types of work:
one manner is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and it is called the form:
And then he puts another cut larger than the first.
And the second manner is that you have many different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron.
and work lightly, so as not to harm the head.
And if the bone is tough and hard, you must bore around it before you administer incisions with drills, not so deep that they do not pierce through the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the point to prevent it from piercing through the bone.
And it is necessary for you to have several, so that each comes into its place in the width of the bone, so that you have pincers for all tests.
and this is the shape of the III types of pincers
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place one pincer on the bone, and turn with your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced.
then place the pincer elsewhere a little after, and do this all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone to your hand, or by some of the instruments that you have such as tongs, pincers.
And take care that you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and drawn it out, you must remove the splinter that remains of the bone with all similar instruments, resembling an awl, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other awl.
And if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with an instrument. Then treat the wound with linens and ointments as we have said.
And the other way of working is that which Galen says is safer; And he praises it greatly, and this is his word. It is first necessary that you uncover part of the bone where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incision.
And do not cut from one side only, for the parts are sharp on both sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; xspace Et quant tu avras bien leu ce chapistre, et entendu les choses dessus diz, si te covient conoistre que li cervel porroit estre si perciet par II manieres.
Then strike with a small mallet from above, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath.
If it is adherent to the bone, lightly scrape it off, for one can remove it well without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the skin, and the bone is only cut slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then you must sharpen that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you should have various quantities, in order to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
If you first use large scrapers, and then more subtle ones afterwards, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other subtle cuts or breaks, you must bring in a reason according to its nature;
and this is something that cannot be answered by someone who has studied this art.
And if the wound is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another double-layered cloth, either two or three times, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to burden the patient, then administer another ligature on top, and do not tighten it too strongly, only enough to touch the wound.
and leave it thus for a day or two, until the abscess has subsided, then remove the ligature, and administer medicines such as lily roots, vetch flour, incense powder, and similar things.
and make a paste of these things, and place it on the wound, and continually administer moistening medicines without irritation.
and ensure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow pus to gather, for when pus gathers on the cloth of the head, it will spread and fester, causing great harm to the patient.
because when one applies a sharp object to the wound, it clots over. Take heed therefore, if any bad accident befalls the patient, as we have said, then doubt is certain.
And if blackness occurs other than from the medicine that has been applied, and it has such power, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix them together to make a poultice; then proceed with the treatment as required until it heals.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose are broken, or only one alone, because these are two bones;
And below it is cartilage, and does not break; it does not cause any force to bow or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or pierce through the nose, and place the breakage inside your index finger, and with your thumb outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then you must place a small amount of fat evenly at the end of a reed.
And if the break is in two parts, then do likewise, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when this swelling has subsided, then insert at the end of the nose some linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
When you push one bone against another, if there is a break and the ligaments are so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
And some say that one should soak the bandages in butter, and change them every day. It does not seem good to me, but they must be moistened in the preparation of an ointment made from egg and powdered myrobalan. then let the ligament alone until the bone is firm and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in the nose instead of ligaments, and then there is a soft cloth around it, and the fracture holds, and the patient breathes through it. or do whatever you wish.
And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working there, put a poultice of oil rose or cotton soaked in aquilon on it.
And if there are no abscesses there, then put a poultice on the outside, made from sesame flour and frankincense powder, mixed with egg ointment, then put light wadding on top, and do not bandage the nose.
and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into many pieces, then apply suitable instruments to it, then sew up the split, and treat it with things that draw flesh, and bind it, such as suitable plasters and ointments.
and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and place lead pins in it until it is healed.
When the jaw is dislocated beneath, and there is no wound outside of it, and the fracture is only outside, and it is not broken in two, then you recognize it easily.
It is necessary that if the fracture is on the right side, you place your index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then place your index finger of the right hand, and push the fracture gently inside, and adjust it with the other hand from without, and make it equal.
And if the jaw fracture is in two pieces, it is necessary that you apply traction of two parts until they are equal.
And if there is movement or loosening of the teeth, hold them in place with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then apply wax on the broken jaw, and put on a double cloth. And put on the cloth a well-made large bandage, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it at the top as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the appearance changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset to the place where it has changed. And apply a plaster made of flour from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame paste, after you have removed the wax.
And put on a light wool bandage, and if the bandage tightens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it heals. Many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et si apostemes se presentent, faictes ce que nous avons dit maintes fois.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, check to see if any piece of bone has been removed. If it has been removed, use suitable instruments for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your needs.
And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, then close the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable dressings to promote healing until it heals.
The collarbone has broken several times before, near the shoulder, and the break is according to three types.
Or it may be broken and separated into two pieces, with parts remaining, and this is the easiest to restore;
Or there may be a break with a wound.
And the work is so when the fracture is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken strength. and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then place the fracture evenly between your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor protrusion.
And if you need to extend more, place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity. and extend and lift the limb, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you place the fracture evenly as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder out of the wound because it is deeply embedded, then it is necessary that the patient lie on their back, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and let the assistant push the shoulder down until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then bring the fracture to your fingers, and if you find it splintered, then it is necessary that you split open.
And draw out the bones lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut it with one of the chisels that you have. but place under the trestle this instrument, to hold the bone in place:
and resembles a spoon, and is not pointed, and should be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
And it should have two heads, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones.
And when you are sure that the abscess is hot, then stitch up the wound, and if the opening is small or you doubt that the abscess is hot, then fill the wound with cloths and bandages according to its size.
And if there are abscesses here, then moisten the cloth with rose oil and asafoetida and wine, and place it on top.
The squeezing of the bone, when it is without wounds and without a fracture, is that you place on the bone the poultice made from powdered millstone and egg white, and put light packing on top, and place a sphere under the seat if you need it. then take a very wide bandage of one palm in width, then place two layers of cloth over the packing and the poultice. then take a subtle strap three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down. and place the strap on the break, and turn the bandage up over the shoulder, and under the healthy seat, and under the unhealthy seat. And there you reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, then you should check it every day, and when the ligament slackens, then you bind it again.
And make the patient lie on his back, and when he sleeps, place a small pillow under the shoulder to raise it up. This will lighten the fracture of the collarbone by straightening the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad incident occurs, for up to twenty days.
Then begin the plaster again, if you see that it is necessary, and bind it and leave it so until he is restored.
And she is restored within twenty-eight days, and within fewer for some men.
Of the fracture of the shoulder
It often happens that the shoulder breaks or tears in a large place and not in the middle, and it should be touched only by hand.
if you prepare it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
then put on the place powder of millet with plenty of egg, and light stuffing, and put on a double cloth. then put on a wide and fine bandage, somewhat wider than the shoulder, and if there are gaps under the bandage in any place of the shoulder, fill those gaps with linen stuffing so that the bandage sits evenly.
And then secure it firmly with a large bandage, so that the bone does not move from its place, and examine the knot each day;
And every time it loosens, secure it again and align the bone if it has shifted from its place, and have the patient lie on his side;
And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
And when this number is completed, release it, and be assured, for the bone does not easily dislocate again.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and touches under the heart, it breaks through, and removes it, and does what we have said in the breaking of the fortress to appease the abscess.
of the break of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; But it often breaks at the tip.
And when it is broken in the middle, it shifts downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of breath, and fainting, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passage in the broken bone, and this can be felt well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies often on his back, and place one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and bring the ribs of the two ribs towards each other with your hands, and use all means you can to align the bone as it should be;
then place over it plasters and wool on a thin salt sheet, or other light wood, and wrap it in one cloth, and bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move. and tie the bandage tightly around the back, and bind it properly, and check every hour to see if it is loosening, and if it does, then bind it again.
and if it is necessary to untie him, due to inflammation or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and untie him, and remove the plaster, and apply a treatment suitable for the condition.
then replace the plaster and bind it until it is healed.
Of rib fractures
Know that the breaking of ribs occurs only in large places after the back, and inside the head, and they break only because they are slippery; and one feels it well at the inquiry by two (methods).
And the treatment is that you set the fracture equal, as it should be. And then apply a plaster, and bind it with a bandage, if necessary.
And if the breaking of the ribs is directed inward, then the patient feels very great pain and pricking, as in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the flesh. and breathes with difficulty, and soon vomits great plenty of blood, and this is of grave illness, and the ancients have placed great skill in it (i.e., treating it).
And there are those who say that it should be administered food that swells the belly to expel the fracture.
We do not do this, lest hot abscesses come, if they have not already come. And if they have come, then heal it.
And some say that one should apply cupping glasses to the place, in order to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable. 》 Toute voie, doubt has that the cupping glass may attract the superfluous fluids to the place due to the weakness of the dislocation.
And some say that the site should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil, and tents are placed between the ribs to make the bandage even all around, then it should be treated according to the treatment of pleurisy, with food and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that punctures the flesh, and there is doubt on the part of the patient, it is necessary to incise upon the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under an instrument to protect the liver.
And then one should saw the bone, and pull gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with poultices until it heals.
And if such abscesses come, place dampened cloths in rose oil on them, and put on the place.
And treat the place as one would an abscess, and let it lie quietly on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
and similarly to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then observe whether you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that he is mortally wounded in many parts, and if he moves them and feels well when they are strained and pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured, provided that one applies treatment there.
And if something similar happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take note whether the feet are numb, and if there are accidents in the hands, and on the back a swelling and involuntary urination;
and when it is laid on its belly, there is involuntary urination. And when it is turned onto its back and wants to sit up, it cannot. Know that it is fatal; If he does not work diligently in his treatment.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the matter is lighter.
And the treatment is such that you should apply a hot poultice if there is heat in the abscess, and place on top of it rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is appeased.
Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
And if any bone breaks, it should be covered with wax. And remove the bone, then join together the two lips of the wound with a stitch if it is large, and treat it with a flesh-forming ointment until he is healed.
and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the shoulder head", place your thumb of your left hand into it, and make it equal to the other hand by your power, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it;
then hold it steady, and if there are any bone splinters, they should be removed, and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the breaking of the bone of the hip
It happens sometimes that the hip bone may be broken, and if it is, there will only be a little weakening at the top. and it breaks longwise, and declines to one side, and the patient feels pain in that place, and bruising, and swells as if broken. ➤
And the treatment is such that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the break. and know what the fracture and its appearance are;
and if the fracture is only in the head, then set this fracture so that it is of natural appearance.
And if the break is lengthwise, or slants towards the inside, then make the patient lie on their stomach, so that you may prepare to restore that break. And when you have set it equal, then apply the plaster, then place a splint of wood or horn over it, and bind the fracture so that it does not move.
and support the place under the ribs, until the limb is level. And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if any abscesses appear there, do not touch them until the abscesses are healed, and then apply what we have said before. And then return to the restoration, and hold it as needed, if there is no bad outcome.
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways.
The first way is that you take a stick full of medium thickness, according to this shape:
And tie at the two ends two strings, and pull them up, and make the patient sit on a seat.
Then you throw the broken arm over the stick, until it reaches the armpit, and in the middle there is a curve of the stick, then pull up some heavy thing that the attendant extends downward.
Then the doctor should place the splint evenly against his hands together, so that the splint returns as it should.
And another way is that one makes the patient lie on his back, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two attendants, one to hold what is above the break in his hands, and the other to hold below all the cord, and each extends at its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the limbs to its side.
And if the splint is near the shoulder's head, it is necessary that you place one string under the armpit, and another towards the side, under the splint.
and thus if the splint is towards the side, it is necessary to place a string lightly, without difficulty, so that the splint is even on the place and on the side.
Then make the splint even as it should be, and bandage it, if any abscesses come there.
And if such abscesses come there, do not bandage it until the seventh day, and place a wet cloth on vinegar and rose oil, until those abscesses are calmed.
Then he holds it, and the manner of holding is that you place the bandage on the fracture, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
And place the cloth and hold onto the shoulder and the arm, so that the arm is in the proper position, unless something prevents it or the bone is not set.
And if you doubt that the bone is not set, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than others, and there should be between each splint two fingers' width, and each splint should be so large that it passes beyond the fracture by three fingers' width on either side.
Then hold it up to the stars, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, stronger and less slanted.
And if you see the base of the bones and the holding as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said;
then check the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur in the area, and that the nursing cannot reach the limb because it is too tight. If you accept it, as we have said.
And if no such incident occurs, do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back with their hands on their stomach.
and place under the shoulder a pillow filled with wool equally, and check each hour of the day or night that the position of the broken limb does not move, nor is the ligament softened;
if he receives it by the power of medicine, and give him the food that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is first finely prepared; and when he begins to recover, let it be thicker.
And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be taken for forty days in total; and then one must unbind and administer baths and ointments to heal the place.
And if the constriction is ugly and clogged, it takes one day or two months to unclog.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "dui foscile", one of which is small and follows the elbow;
And the other is large, and this one is below, towards the little finger.
By chance, only the large tendon breaks, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
When the small tendon is broken, the restoration is easy, and so is the healing;
And when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more serious than when both are broken together.
If it is only the small fuscille that is broken, one should extend it lightly and make it equal.
And if it is the large tendon, it must be stretched more tightly;  /> Et se c'est li petis, il n'i covient pas tant grant force;
And extend it on the pillow, and raise the heel of the hand higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the pillow in front of him higher, so that the patient does not endure any effort.
Then extend one of your arms to the lower part under his hand or at the wrist, and another minister above.
Et puis, remets-le en place le chirurgien, selon la meilleure forme possible.
Et si, dans une fracture où il y a des fragments, alors remets chaque fragment à sa place; et s'il y en a un qui dépasse et touche le cœur, et que tu ne peux pas le ramener à sa place, fends-le et retire-le, comme nous l'avons dit précédemment.
And if there is a fracture with a wound, I have spoken about it in a specific chapter; then take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the treatment such abscesses appear, then apply a cloth of plaster made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and delicately place the cloth on top until those abscesses are soothed.
And then remove the plaster and apply the poultice of milled powder with plenty of egg, then put on the bandages, and let the bandage on the fracture be always stronger, and a little wider than the others;
And know that it must have six stars or ribs on the arm in various positions. whether the break is in one of the bones, or in two.
and press more on the break than elsewhere, and always less while pulling, as I said at the beginning of the chapter. and let the rags that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and let the rags that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread, with which it is tied, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And wrap the limb and the tendon after some days. And if any bad thing happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must rinse the limb with hot water until that itching is calmed.
And let the member not rest too tightly.
And then begin the splinting again, and if the tendon is weakened and the bone dislocated, or similar things, treat it accordingly.
And if you take precaution that the nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it in a pot, and leave it thus for some days until the nourishment can pass through, and then splint it.
And if none of these things happens to the patient, do not release him until 20 days have passed.
or in which case, he should place his hands around his neck, and let his neck be equal on both sides, and guard against movement and shifting, and sleep on his back;
and know that this fracture is healed in thirty or thirty-five days, and perhaps even twenty, according to the composition and complexion of the body's humors.
Of the break of the hand
Know that in the back of the hand and at the fingers there are few breaks, and it only happens that there is often a sprain.
And when a plant [i.e., bone] of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit cross-legged, and sit straight in front of himself equally;
then place his hand on the stretched table, and let the minister straighten the broken bones, and let the doctor set them evenly until they are well joined;
And put the poultice and bandages on it, if there are no abscesses, then apply a compress according to the size of the wound. And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is around the waist near the lower belly, make a sphere of cloths and instruct the patient to tie it to his broken part. And then bind it with a long cloth, and let the compress be made of soft kersey as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it as needed.
And if the break is in the hand, you must place a bandage on top and another below the hand so that the fingers are open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and make the knot between the two fingers.
And if the break occurs in one of the fingers, whether it is sprained or dislocated, set it straight as needed. And hold it with the sole of the foot, and if you see this, place a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move.
And if the break is in another toe, such as in the big toe or one of the others, place it evenly, and bind it with the sound toe that follows. Or tie them all together in a single bandage, whatever works, or place a splint on top, as with the foot.
And take care in the restoration and positioning of a hot abscess, and secure it with what comes to it, as I have said.
The thigh bone is often broken, and this is evident when the leg turns in front or behind;
And its restoration is such that one ligament is tied above the fracture, and another below. And let the patient lie on his back, then each assistant should extend their ligament to its equal part;
and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then let one ligament be towards the knee, and the other ligament below the break.
And also if it is near the knee, then let the ligament be by the knee, and let the extension be downwards.
Then let the surgeon align the bone with his two hands so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and bind it, if pus does not come out.
And if there is hot pus, let it quiet down first before returning to your work and treatment. The ligature is made in such a way.
It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture I bandage thick and double in II or III, and remove any excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the base of the big toe, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, near the knee below, and let the ends of the thread come out above;
then turn the bandage around the leg and the thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and place a splint on the bone of the leg;
then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make the splint equal in size, then begin to tie firmly III or IV turns on the fracture; And as one goes higher towards the fracture, it strains less;
Then thread two knots in the thread that you have passed between the thigh and the leg, and tie three knots that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot.
And it strains so that it does not move from its place; then leave it thus, for if there comes no abscess or swelling or other similar thing. And if it happens, then unbind it, and address what comes as we have said many times.
And if there are bone fragments that protrude, they must be removed, if possible. And if it cannot be done, then the site must be split and pulled strongly. And treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And sometimes the thighbone is broken like a splinter, as in the shoulder and arm;
nevertheless, in such restoration, the patient does not become lame.
And know that the thigh is restored in five days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
Saiches que en la ruelle du genouil advient peu de fracture, mais elle ploie souvent.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est que d’une fente, ou une perte, et il advient à toute plaie, et sans plaie, et cela se sent bien.
And the restoration is like placing equal that which is round to its two sides, so that it can be joined together.
then apply the plaster, and put a round splint in it if needed, and secure it as required, then follow all the arrangements that we have said for other fractures, such as abscess and others. treat each injury with what is needed until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones. One is called by its right name "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile.
And there is the same break as in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns from all sides.
And if the small bone is broken, it will turn to the front.
And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; and it turns downwards.
Then apply traction, and make it even, and bind the splints equally;
however, if the break is ugly and there are several fragments, then traction should be lesser and lighter; And align according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of wood shavings that wrap around the leg on both sides, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee downwards.
Then wrap the two of them with one bandage on top and another below, and tie it in the middle as well. And at this point the leg will not be able to decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is well.
And some apply splints along the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and one puts the leg in it to prevent movement. Properly done, this is for a fracture where there is a wound.
And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other incident. If the cure is such that it may heal.
Of the breaking of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there is no breaking, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and the two heels, and in this case it is only splintering in several directions.
And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones rising above one another, then put the patient's foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then place your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
Then place the dressing and wool on top, and under the sole of the foot put a small board with two full nails, then fasten it securely to the foot, after which you wrap bandages around, and other things that you need.
And when three days or four have passed, then unbind the ligament, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any broken fingers, restore them, just as we have said for the fingers of the hand; Then place a splint on the broken finger according to its length, and let it be a little wider, then place beneath the foot the table that I have mentioned, and bind firmly.
and if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, then place a splint on each finger according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the table beneath the foot; and let it stand on top of the table, beyond the foot's belly, so that it holds it well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said. And assist each incident as needed.
of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
When the woman's natural bones are broken, have her sit upright, then lean her towards the back, and let her be held from behind.
Then fill the woman's natural cavity with cotton, and put in as much as needed.
Then have the woman stand up and lift her back little by little, and then the cotton will jump out until it reaches the entrance of the vagina, and the bone will return with the cotton.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or more. Thus the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder, and attach a cord to its opening, and insert all of it into the vagina. Then blow into the cannula strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside. the nature will return to the fracture;
then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of a man's or woman's fist is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone;
and these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who put their effort and skill into it, and understand my book.
For the fracture indicates in several situations the correct path to restoration: understand it then.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; Then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days wrapped thus, and it will be healed quickly.
of break with wound
It is necessary for someone who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder bone or similar, to be bled now, just like the bleedings we have mentioned testify.
And if the wound is healthy, then seal it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or that day, unless an abscess forms there.
And if an abscess forms there, then wait until the ninth day to resume treatment, until the abscess subsides, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad outcome.
And if the broken bone is protruding through the skin, it is necessary that you gently grasp it with your hands and apply slight traction.
And if the extensions are not prepared to be equal to your hands, then reset it with this iron instrument which has seven or eight teeth, and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary for the physician to have three or four [of these instruments], according to what he needs in each wound treatment.
And let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend at the pressure on the member during your work, and let it be pointed in front, and thick from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called "palainche," which is why the curved head must be placed on top of the visible bone. and it should be struck once, so that it returns, and is equal one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well take the bone, then it is necessary that you cut off the head of the bone, so that the instrument has control over it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then strike it with a suitable instrument for this purpose, either a scalpel or scissors, according to your ability;
then remove the bone fragments and small splinters that remain in the bone.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do this until it is in its place, then moisten the bandage in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is summer. and do not put any ointment or other greasy substance on the wound, as it will cause rotting and corruption.
Then administer stitches when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound open, and cut the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and be sure that the wound is not constricted with the fracture;
And many times have foolish physicians done this, causing the patient to either die or be crippled. And let the constriction be softer and gentler than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that evil occurrences may happen as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not necessary to apply stitches there. But instead of stitches, bind hard cloths around it and tie them.
And when you see after one day or two that the wound is swelling, remove everything you have put on it at once, and apply a healing ointment to the wound, such as tetrapharmacon or similar ointments.
And you must unbind the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the swelling runs downwards lightly.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but rather swells again, know that there are small bone fragments causing the wound to swell and bringing this pain.
And if a fistula forms at the site, or another type of corruption occurs, you must treat it according to what is said in the previous chapter.
And when the bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bones, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times this causes death, but leave it until it rots.
Perhaps it will fall out by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, leave it alone.
We often see good health after the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the limb's condition; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care, therefore, if the bone is fresh: If you administer to him medicines that are styptic, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolle, and similar others, in the manner that you take some of these things, or all together, and boil them with styptic wine, or with an abundance of egg, or with oil; And place them on the wound in cloths, and bind it well, and do not unbind it for many days;
And place them on the wound in cloths, and bind it well, and do not unbind it for many days; And then unbind it, and begin again another, until the knotting is removed;
Or you bind onto a well-made plate of lead. For the property of lead is such that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
And if the knotting has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then scrape off its surface, and make the superfluous part evident. You shall have it rasped by some rasp until it is removed, and the wound cared for until it is healed.
of the limb that is weak after healing
When the bone fracture is repaired, but afterwards the limb remains weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb. or because of excessive bleeding; or because of too great movements, not at the right time. or because he has little blood in his body, so it is weak.
And the care is such that you make the patient eat and soften the body until the blood is increased in him. And give the patient a bath, and bring him joy and happiness;
then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch draws out much pus, and wash it often with cold water, until the pus flows from the limb; and returns to its natural shape.
of the twisted limb after healing When the limb is twisted after being set, and the broken bone is visible, and the shape of the limb is unsightly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
do not believe those fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
and these actions are blamed, and great harm comes from it, and perhaps death.
Nevertheless, if the swelling and inflammation are recent, it is necessary that they be bathed in hot water, or herbs with a softening effect should be boiled, such as mallow leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things.
And he makes a softening poultice, such as well-made diquilon, and you take the mucilage of mallow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply the poultice on top.
Or you take fatty figs, and grind them with bran of flax, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
And sometimes the dislocation is removed by continually and for a long time rubbing with wet hands. And let there be gentle movement to the limb each hour.
And if the swelling is old and hardened, like stone, and needs to be removed with an iron instrument, then it must be shaved down to the bone with a fine, sharp knife. And put prudence and diligence in the treatment.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation happens to someone, it must immediately be reset without delay.
For if one delays, the place swells, and perhaps it is only with great difficulty that it can be reset to its place;
because it is not fitting that one moves it at the hour when it is swollen: many times it brings on cramp and other pains;
nevertheless, when this happens, have the patient bleed, then leave them until the inflammation has subsided;
then foment the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as it returns to its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
Rarely do both jaws become dislocated at the same time, and the dislocation of both is according to two methods: And they are slightly removed from their places, and softened a little. and they are completely dislocated, hanging down towards the chest, and saliva runs from his mouth so that he cannot hold it back or close his mouth, and his tongue is tangled with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through many positions.
And if it [the dislocation] is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it immediately, without delaying at all;
and in such a way that the attendant holds the patient's head, and the practitioner places his little finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two fingers are placed evenly.
And instruct the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them from all sides. And the physician should set it right, until it returns to its place.
And if the relocation is difficult, especially if it involves both jaws together, soak them in hot water and oil until they can be easily reset.
Do not hesitate to reset them, as we have said.
And when they are reset equally and the patient's mouth closes well without swelling, place moistened cloths in a plaster made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft bands.
And let the patient sleep on their back with their head between two pillows so that they do not move to the right or left, nor should they try to speak, but rather eat light food until the pain has passed and the jaws have healed.
And then he chews what he wants lightly, and does not exert himself to open his mouth for eating or drinking, as long as the jaw is well tied and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be set right within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and sudden illness may follow, and perhaps intestinal discharge, and possibly pure bile will be vomited.
And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times he dies who experiences this, within nine days.
The jawbone cannot dislocate from the inside or from the foot, and sometimes it dislocates downward, which is easily felt.
And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on his back and stretches out his arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
then apply the plaster and bandage, and bind it tightly.
and the joint that is towards the knife cannot dislocate; if not, and if it dislocates any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
Then put on the plaster and bandage it, and bind it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
And thus the same thing happens with the dislocated shoulder when it is removed from its place.
Of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in only three ways:
one of which is when it dislocates toward the lower part of the armpit; and the second is toward the side of the chest; and perhaps it dislocates toward the upper part, which happens rarely.
and it does not dislocate backward behind the shoulder, nor inward toward the nerves;
and often it dislocates downward toward the armpit, especially for those who have little flesh, because then it moves quickly. xspace
to those who have enough flesh, barely, and it enters barely.
And sometimes it happens to some men that they experience bruising or fracturing, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated for this reason.
Therefore, you must examine it until you are certain. And then begin the treatment.
The dislocation is known when it falls towards the shoulder blade, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the scapula at the armpit the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg. And the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you can clearly see it in the armpit.
et cette manière de dislocation n'est pas facile à remettre en place lorsqu'elle est nouvelle, ou si l'enfant est malade.
And the manner is that the servant takes the patient's hand up high, then places his fingers underneath the axilla, and lifts the joint with force up to its place. And the servant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then places it below. Then it will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in the hand within several days afterward, then the patient must be bathed in hot water. And let the servant make a softening and soothing mixture, such as a decoction of hollyhock, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and apply it.
then the patient should be placed on his back, and under the armpit a pad of wool should be put, not too soft nor too hard, then the physician should place his heel on the pad, and lift the shoulder head skillfully, and pull the patient's hand;
and another assistant should hold the patient's head so that it does not move downward; then the shoulder returns immediately, and if you see this, you should reset it in this manner:
and it is necessary that a man be present who is larger than the patient; and he should stand straight towards the patient's side, and place his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit up high, so that the patient hangs in the air; And another minister draws the patient's hand down towards the stomach. And if the patient is too light, then have him hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation will return now.
And it is reset in another way:
and it is done by driving a long stick into the ground, so that the head is as round as a fist, neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed under the patient, but let there be soft cloths on top, and the patient should stand along the length of the stick; xspace
then his hand should be stretched down on the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
And if it does not want to return through all these things that we have said, then perform this treatment: Take a stick of two arms' length and four finger-breadths wide, which has a round head to enter deeply under the shoulder blade, according to this shape:
then place the pole on top of the patient's head, under a drape, so that the pole does not hurt the patient, then put it underneath the patient's backside;
and extend the other arm along the length of the pole, and place the shoulder on the pole, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm on the rung of a wide ladder, and let the hands hang down, and let the body hang freely from the other side: now the joint returns to its place.
And when it is inside, in whatever manner it may be, you must place under the seat an equal sphere of wool, then apply the prepared plaster of powdered millstone, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around it, then tie it securely under the seat, and wrap the bandage over the plaster, and hold the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
And it is necessary that he rests a little, until the member is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
and then rests more afterwards for five or seven days, and moves it; And if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three cauteries, as it is explained in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot raise its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the foot, and the hips, or the back, is done by pushing, and stretching of hands, and another remedy is applied there;
and it is treated until it is healed.
And if after healing there is stiffness in the limb and slowness of movement, then the patient should take a bath many times until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
of the dislocation of the rib
Know that the dislocation of the elbow is dislocated by points, and returns by points;
And if it has dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, the dislocation is not repaired, because one can see and feel it well. And dislocates according to each shape. Et when you join the sick coute with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is cut, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it before any abscess forms there, for if an abscess forms, it would be difficult to set back.
And perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the rear; It is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and death may occur.
And the restoration is such that when it can be set back, you should extend its hand with both your hands; and his arms should be spread, and the hands of the surgeon according to the bone around, above and below, and press the joint together with his thumbs or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et si the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strikes with the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
And if it does not wish to return to its place, administer a strong extension;
and let two assistants extend the arm, and hold it still with two assistants, so that it does not move during the extension.
then turn the arm in all directions, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
and when the surgeon has brought the joint together with his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then press the joint strongly until it returns.
and when it is in place, put on a dry bandage with some egg, and hold it firmly, and tie the arm to the patient's neck, and leave it for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it;
And if you see that the joint does not hold well, then begin again with the bandage and the band, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set. Then release it.
And if the patient feels stiffness after the joint has been set and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is eased. or you place on the joint a greasy piece of sheep's wool, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make it enter the bath; and when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times, until it is healed.
and if you see, then put on moistened cow dung heated with butter, and bandage it up;
it will return to its proper position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joints of the hand are dislocated, and their relocation is light, more than other joints. However, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the place does not swell, or a hot abscess develops. 》
And the restoration is that you place the afflicted hand on a table, and the minister extends his hand, and the physician places it equally, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
However, you must check if it is properly in place; Then the patient should place the back of his hand on a table for extension and restoration. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and the physician should place his hand on that part of the joint.
If it returns now, that is good. If not, then apply soothing plasters for such abscesses, and leave it thus without repeating the process.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint remains dislocated; ️
And do not cause any harm to the patient further than the hand is wet, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerve has been cut or the artery.
if there is no other means than to grasp by cautery near the wound, and perhaps it serves no other purpose.
And when the hand is in place, apply the poultice we mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then unbind and leave it thus.
And if he cannot move it well and there is stiffness, then moisten it with hot water and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or the wrist.
then extend the fingers and push the dislocation back towards you until it returns, then support the head of the finger and turn it towards the part where it is dislocated.
and leave it for two days, and then set it straight on the third day;
And of night the ligament, as we have said, and unbinds by day, and makes it move, and binds it again at night;
And do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and act as you have done before, until it is healed.
And do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
Of the dislocation of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several dislocations, there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
And the sign is that the excretion jumps out without willpower, and one cannot hold it in, and often some member becomes soft, whether the two thighs or the two arms or one.
And often the spine moves in four parts;
that which moves at the back is called "scoliosis":
The remedy is such that you treat if the curvature has come from childhood: there is no cure or healing for the whole of it.
And those that come from falling or striking or similar things, the ancients speak of cures in great words where there is not always great benefit;
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have made instruments in various ways.
I say that in the curvature that comes in the chest, there is no skill or healthiness;
and also that which comes straight into two ribs, and one cannot cure except for the one that comes directly to the back, as I say.
and is such that the patient should be stretched out on his back in one equal place, and have support under him, so that he does not injure himself.
then drive a stake firmly into the ground at the head, and another at the feet, and tie one rope under the patient's ankles, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
and two assistants should hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes.
and ensure that the stakes are securely in place, as we have said, and let the physician place his palms firmly on the spine until it returns [to its original position].
And if it does not return to its original position with this treatment, then take a board three arms long, and place it under the patient's back, and let the patient be on their side, and push the end of the board under the back, then put the middle of the board on the spine; pgfqpoint And let the physician place his feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
And if you see it happen, do the same at the shoulder that turns towards the hand. And it is that you place two faggots at the head of the patient, one on each side of the body, and between each faggot, above and below, there should be a hand's breadth of space.
And let there be in each faggot a hole, where the shoulder fits, and let the faggots be firmly in the ground, so that they do not move.
And between each of the two faggots, there should be a rotating faggot, on which the rope turns, and for the two turnings, there should be two small faggots the length of a hand, to turn the shoulder.
And then have the patient lie down with a ligature between their legs at the tourniquet towards the head, and the other ligature towards the feet at the other tourniquet, and each of the assistants turn their tourniquet for the entire ligature, and the master should place the spindle evenly as we have said.
And when it is even, place a desiccating poultice with plenty of egg, and then the bandages, and then a strip from a board three fingers long, which should cover the area of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a ligature, as we have said, and let the patient use delicate nursing until they are healed;
And if something happens at the end of the treatment, then it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, along with the poultice that we have mentioned before; And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes it appears at the back of the spine, and one thinks that this is a dislocation; and it is the bone that has broken through, which is why one should not have any presumption about it: by chance it could bring death.
Know that at the hips and shoulders, only dislocation occurs, not like in other joints;
and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: Inside and outside, front and back;
And more inside than elsewhere, hardly dislocates in front or behind.
And the sign of its dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more open is the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot double his knee to the fire; And the place that is nearby is swollen with abscess is hot, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of that which comes to pass, so it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the sign of the one in front is that he stretches his leg according to its length; yet he does not double his knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and holds his urine, and the ankle swells, and when walking, he walks on his heels.
And the sign of that which comes to pass behind, so it is that they cannot spread their knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the hip bone is in the place below the ribs.
The remedies for this type of dislocation are such that you should consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, then there is no treatment. And it is not necessary for him to have any presumption.
And in that where the dislocation is fresh, and this occurs in four ways of dislocation, then you must hurry to return the joint, and push it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left. Perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is necessary.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant, and strongly support the leg with two hands, or with one hand that is tied above the knee. And another assistant extends his hand over it in such a manner that he places his hands under the cushions, then binds with a soft bandage on the thigh; and another holds the end of the bandage.
And they pull upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
This method of extension is common in four ways; if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then it is necessary to take care of its appearance.
When the dislocation is at the shoulder, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the place that is under the armpit, then pull the bandage up towards the armpit, and towards the chest;
Then let another assistant take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the sick thigh, and stretch it firmly. now it will return to its place;
and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot secure it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft band around both ankles and both knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers' width more than the other.
then let it be hung over the top of a beam, and let it be two arms' length above the ground;
then instruct one assistant to embrace the top of the thigh, and let another assistant hang with the patient, who should embrace the thigh firmly, because the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides,
Et li maistres le retaigne par dessus sus le col, et en ceste maniere deveint li malaides sanz aucune dolor. Et quant il est a point, si le ramoine en ceste maniere: il tient l’olle par dessus, et les cuixes entre ses bras, si les distent tant qu’il voit que li malaides ad son membre tout reteigne; puis le fait asseoir sus sa lite, et lui met II coussins sous la teste, et II autres sur la jambe, puis un autel sous les piez, et l’olle et les cuixes il li enlace, et ainsi le tient une heure ou II au plus.
If it returns, that's good.
If not, place him on the table and press it as we have said in the case of dislocation, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary to extend the injured leg quickly, as I have said. And let the doctor apply his strength to be on the injured shoulder, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is backward, then it is not necessary to extend the injured one downwards or lift it off the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said about lying on two hips. And let him be on his back, and the strap extended as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table. And it will be perfect when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal. then draw together the thighs, and apply a poultice, and hold it in place with a bandage, so that the hip does not move. and let him rest for three or four days, then unbind him, and apply another poultice on top;
and if you see that they are equal, then bind as before, and leave it for three days.
then unbind him, and let him walk gently, until the limb is healed.
of the knee dislocation
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward. ‌
And do not dislocate beforehand.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at his thigh, and if it does not adhere to his thigh, know that he is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on top of your feet.
then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then strongly bend the two sides of the knee. and another assistant extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he adheres his leg to his thigh lightly.
And put the poultice on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three days or four, then unbind.
And let the patient not exert himself in walking, until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The ankles are sometimes swollen and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen and protrudes forward towards the dislocated part:
The resetting should be gentle, and it should be gently extended at its hands when only slightly moved.
And when it is fully dislocated, you should make the patient sit up straight and have one assistant hold the leg by the foot, above the ankle;
Then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, then with the left two times, then extend it upwards and nicely push the foot up;
And do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot.
If it returns, that is good;
if not, then begin the work again, for it will return.
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and drive one strong stake firmly into the ground between his thighs, and tie cloths around [it], so that it does not hurt the patient.
then let one servant take hold of the thigh, and another servant extend the foot to his hands or with one band, which he ties above the ankle; then let each servant pull equally, and let the stake be always between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when [he] is stretched.
Then let the physician set the dislocation evenly with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg from below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is perfectly set, apply the bandage and padding on top, bind it very tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and protect the nerves that are above the ankle in the back, so that the binding is not too tight;
then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage softens, bind it again.
Then unbind on the third or fourth day, and advise the patient not to walk for four days. And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses come here, you must soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
of two When the fingers are dislocated, they must be stretched nicely without effort, and this is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any node of the back or foot, you must make the patient sit on a plain place or on a table completely straight, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot strongly until it returns.
And when it is level and nothing opens, place under the foot a board with two legs, then press strongly, and leave it for three days, then release. And let it rest until it is healed.
Of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not learned in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, do not be bold. xspace
And use at first things that calm a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health. And when you see hope, reset the limb to its place immediately before the hot abscess grows there;
And when the limb is in place, administer things that calm hot abscesses and treat the wound as needed with dried onions.
And if there is also a fracture with the dislocation and small bones are shattered, remove them and do what we have said in simple diseases.
And guard yourself from entering into fear, as I have said, for this will move you according to your Creator and for the safety of your weapon and body.
