O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made the end through its explanations and by its clarifications. And it has come to me in a vision that I should complete it for you with this treatise, which is part of the manual work, namely "surgery.
And because the manual work is foreign to our region and is alien in every way, thus the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except for a few descriptions in ancient books that the hands have moved. And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed off and the science is distant.
Or it seems to me that I want to revive it together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation. And I will bring together the forms of the cautery irons and other tools for the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them as necessary.
And because no skilled hand masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected. And it is necessary for one who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and their course and the moving and resting veins, and the place of their origin.
And because Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, but with the work it is little; and likewise in the art of surgery.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should guard against falling into error and harming people.
in such a way that I have often seen many of these who involve themselves in this science and so abandon their knowledge and experience.
Because I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; which is why so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another doctor who extracted a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; and he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to remove it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one cut him he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took into his care a duke of our land whose leg was broken and with the fracture had an open wound; 》
and the doctor, full of ignorance, pulled on the fracture over the wound with strong forceps, leaving no gauze on the wound, and left it so for one night;
And he commanded him not to dislocate it at all;
And so it remained until the leg was completely swollen and the foot came to gangrene.
I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; And when I dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But nevertheless the corruption had already taken hold in the limb, and could not be healed;
And the corruption did not stop spreading through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
And I saw another doctor who opened an abscess, and then ignited it with his evil will.
For a cancer, when it is purged of black bile, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a place that all the corruption can be completely removed.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that manual work is divided into two parts: That is to say, work in which there is danger in many situations;
And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
For which reason it is necessary that you guard against it, so that the foolish physician cannot speak ill of you.
Therefore take up your weapons in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you may come to safety and be praised.
And leave behind the fearful diseases with great certainty;
And remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: Do not undertake to treat serious illnesses, lest you be called a foolish physician.
"I have arranged this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cautery and cautery with medicine of garlic, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet.
and of the shapes of the instruments, and the irons for cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter also concerns cutting and piercing, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
and the chapter is ordered according to the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter concerns the restoration of dislocations and twists, and similar things;
And it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the shapes of the instruments.
So that we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of aid and harm of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest speech and most subtle science, and the secret answers.
And about this many wise men have spoken, and they agreed on it.
And their words seemed little to me, for I fear lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps universally in every condition where there is material, except for two conditions: That is to say, a hot complexion without material and a dry complexion without material.
In a hot and dry complexion together with material, some have argued and said that cautery is of great help there;  et the others said the opposite: that cauterization is not effective against diseases caused by heat and dryness. For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for hot diseases or with dryness;
and he who said the opposite says that cauterization is very helpful against hot and dry diseases in the human body. For when you compare the human body and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it true through experience.
And however, one should not interfere with it except for someone who has practiced it and knows through long experience the chapter on cauterization, the diversity of human complexions, the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and duration of time;
we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the doctors gathered and agreed on the cautery.
And know, son, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and more beneficial than cauterization with burning medicine.
For fire is simple and does not spread beyond the member that is burned, and it harms no other member unless it can.
The burning medicines spread from one member to another, and they bring serious illnesses to the member. And by chance kill the patient.
The fire, due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance, does not do so unless there is an excess.
And this I have found through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, based on the truth of things;
and therefore I apologize for the length of this explanation, because it is not my pleasure to withhold from you the secret that lies in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases of the body, as the philosophers say in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agreed upon what time the cauteries should be done, and selected patients.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm that occurs is remedied by the aid of cauterization; and also if the cauterization is necessary for pain that is urgent and pressing, so that it cannot wait until a greater harm comes to the limb.
And never think of this, dear son, as the foolish doctors do; for an illness that is cured by cauterization does not return; and they say it thus;
and they say it thus; but it is not as they think, because cauterization is only a medicine that changes the temperament, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and it works more quickly than other medicines due to the power of its work and dominion.
And it can happen that the illness comes sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the place of the illness and its strength.
and the superfluities are assembled in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered in place where there is little superfluousness and moisture, such as cauterizations of teeth for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return. but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and this is true.
but they do not believe that cauterization is worthwhile after medication, but their intentions are false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in some illnesses and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
The ancients said that cautery with a gold instrument is better than with iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance.
and they said that the site of cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have proven it, and I found that it is true in some men.
and gold cautery is better than iron, as they said. And yet, when you heat a gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot enough by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly.
and if one heats it too much; if it is done in fire; And thus there are enough obstacles.
Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
This cautery is effective against moisture and cold in the head, and there are two types made for this reason: one is due to a disease called "soda," and the other is due to various humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and cause many dreams, toothache, sore throat, and all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The shape of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a dissolving medicine, modifying the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength, the age, and the habit of the patient can tolerate; And then have the patient's head shaved.
And then have him sit crossed-legged between your hands, and place his hands on his feet;
Then place the root of your palm at the root of his nose between his two eyes; And where your fingers will be, there will bleed and warm the cautery which is called "olive," of which here is the form: And place it on the spot marked with ink, and make in descending and stretching your hand little by little while turning. Then lift your hand immediately, and return to the place if you see the bone is not yet visible; And if you do not see it, then repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
After that, take a little silk, and put it in warm and soft cotton inside, and place on the spot, and leave it there for three days.
After that, place a piece of moistened linen on top of butter. And let it sit until the burn is healed. Afterward, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it drains more. and for this reason, it is beneficial to move.
And some of them said that the cautery should be applied so long that part of the bone is burnt; and then scrape off what has been burnt from the bone, and let it heal.
And others say that the cautery should be left on for so long, and pressed so hard that it cuts into the bone as wide as a spindle whorl that women use in their distaffs, so that the humors may exit more.
and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterward, one should cure and suture it.
And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be good in every way, except in certain men where there is fear.
and it seems to me that I should leave him alone;
because the head is weakened by continuous natural dislocations, as we have seen in other limbs;
and similarly when the patient's head is naturally weak, and the first signs of cauterization are more healing and beneficial to me, I then work with that together for salvation.
When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts long, then the patient should use herbs and pills called "coccium," and of purging the head and oils and poultices; and if one makes the cautery that we have previously mentioned, and it does not help. Take care if the patient's head is of a strong nature, and that it is not too cold; Then cauterize under that cautery a little, as we have said above. Then make a cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery in the place that is called "vasculum"; and this is the place where one applies cupping glasses; and raise your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
and the cauteries of the horns should be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the shape:
Of the cautery of the head When there is sudden pain in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the eye is purged with purgative medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the classification of diseases, and none of this helps: Then he makes cauteries in two ways, that is to say with hot iron and with fire.
The cautery with hot iron is done by taking a piece of alder wood, removing the bark and shaping it into two points, then making an incision in the place where the pain is such that you can insert the alder wood under the skin.
and when it is inserted, tie and bind it well and leave it so for twelve hours; and then untie it and pull out the alder wood, and let the wound remain so for two or three days; then put a cotton cloth soaked in butter on the wound until pus comes out.
After the treatment with ointment, when it is healed;
And if you see it thus, do as with some burning medications that I have written in the twelfth treatise on burning medications.
Le fer cautère est fait de cette manière. Chauffe le cautère comme suit :
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a small bowl where there is a hole, and in the middle there is a small opening;
and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn it lightly a little, until half of the thickness of the head is burned;
and lift your hand so that the surrounding area does not burn, which is outside, and an abundance of blood will flow out.
Afterwards, place cotton in vinegar, and apply it to the spot for three days; then place dampened cotton in butter, and then dress the wound with bandages until it is healed.
And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cautellare", then use all the point, and beware of cutting the artery in this migraine which is not old.
of migraine
When you cure the migraine as we have previously said in the division of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cautery of medicine and iron does not suffice for it, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it becomes white;
and thus place on the painful spot a line of half two in length, and remove your hand once, and hold it so that you do not cut the artery and that you do not reach the bone;
and beware of the jawbone that moves while eating, and let the nerve not move or spasm in the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, for there is great fear in cutting, and also for him who does not know how to do it, and who is not trained and experienced; and leave the work halfway;
but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be done in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, along with the cautery that has two knives. And this cautery is better and more helpful than that one.
of the ear pain due to cold
When ear pain comes from cold, and one has worked with solvent medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "point," of which here is the shape:
Afterward, prick all around the sore ear or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place. And let there be ten points around each ear.
Afterward, heal the area until it is healed.
of mouth torture
The ulcer that must be cured by cautery is none other than those caused by inflammation, as we have said in the classification of diseases;
And do not perform cautery on similar things that come from drying out and paralysis of nerves.
When you treat this type of injury that comes from the poison of serpents and from purging the head and gargling, and if it does not work, then you must perform three cauteries on the patient. One at the root of the ear, and the other a little below the temple, and the third between the two lips.
And place the cautery on the part that looks healthy, and make a cautery at the top of the ear above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; And leave the cautery there until half the head is burnt.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And it resembles the lancet that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the blade be a little larger;
after curing the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When the stroke is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four cauteries: Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one in the place that is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the stomach's mouth;
And let it be cared for as we have said before.
Of lead poisoning
At this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that purify the brain.
After this, wash the head of the patient thoroughly, and place on the back of the head a mustard plaster as is written in the treatise on plasters.
And this is the manner of the cautery: Do it as I have said.
If he is cured in this way, good. And if not, let three cauteries be made in the middle of the head descending to the neck, and there should be two fingerbreadths between each cautery.
And treat it as the others, and if you see something added, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle. And if necessary, two more on the two horns, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
And let the cautery be called "olivare," as I have said before.
It is necessary that the head be cleansed of hairs and what we have said before;
then shave the patient's head, after which make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, one behind, and three on the spine of the neck.
And if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient can withstand it, and the disease is severe, make four cauteries on the spine of the back. And leave them until the most heated part is burnt, and then remove your hand. After the treatment, until he is healed, and let the cautery called "olivare" that we have mentioned before be used.
Of epilepsy
Those who suffer from epilepsy should not use cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to purify the brain with years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is strong and able to take medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, give him a gargle and chew the brain often with good food.
After the king cuts off the head in the middle, make a cautery as we have said before, and a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn. And if the patient is strong and can endure it, make a cautery as I have said for those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped as I have said.
If the patient is a child, perform the subtle cautery as follows:
When due to melancholy there are superfluous or corrupt moisture and thick phlegm, then use the same cautery as mentioned for those with paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluity inclines towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give him something to drink that will purify his brain, as mentioned earlier in the chapter.
After washing the head of the patient; then make a bandage of linen well made, like a circle, and place it on the head.
And the patient should sit with their arms crossed, and be held firmly from all sides.
then present the linen and wash it with old sheep's butter. and heat [the linen] over a moderate fire, so that two can touch it without being burned. xspacexn then empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool.
And do this for the patient once a week with good care until they are healed.
And if you see cauterizing it by making several points throughout the cautery.
This method of cauterization moistens the brain equally;
And then apply moistened cotton in butter and goose fat.
from the fear of the eyes When fear comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moistness, and make them sweat in the bath several times while fasting.
Then command him to lift his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent is on both eyes together, or one if the descent is on one.
and cut all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temples;
and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, staunch it with such power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how to staunch it.
And sometimes one applies cautery or burning under the two rear bones.
and one sees that it is from cold, phlegmatic excesses, then the practitioner performs the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this work, descending towards the eyes; Cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries in the rear under the two bones. And if there is further need, then cauterize judiciously over the forehead with small cauteries all around it.
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient to drink three times cooked eggs. after the king of the head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the two shoulders, one a little below the eyebrows;
and beware of the artery lest you cover it.
And this is the shape of the cautery called "clavilis":
When the eyelid is softened by illness and moisture, then use this cautery called "olivare" for it. de ceo est li formes:
And if you see so, make two cauteries on the two shoulders as long as the shoulders are;
and do not leave the hand there except until the third part of the skin is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
because of the hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes is turned towards the inside and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries in two ways: This is to know about fire, or burning medication.
Or the fire cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and equal; And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until they are born.
When they are born and equal, then put the patient in your health; After, let there be on the skin of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
Then put moistened cotton with egg white and mastic on the eye, then heat the cautery whose form is this:
After cauterizing on the face where you have a pimple or lesion, do so very carefully several times until the area is burned.
and the sign of the healing of the work is that you see the skin drawn back, and the hairs raised at the edge of the wound.
then remove your hand, and leave it this way for three days, then apply a cotton swab dampened in butter until the scalding is gone. after the treatment of the burn until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come back and the skin is softened, then begin again with the cautery on that same spot, just as you did first.
and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural place, and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and equal, then make a form from parchment like the leaf of myrtle.
Then take French soap and quicklime, one ounce of each, and grind them well together. And do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it over the form you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and place it on the paper of the eyes. And if the disease is in one eye only, then work on that one alone, and if in both as well. And place moistened cotton under the eye like egg white.
And let the patient's head be in your hand and place your finger on top of the medicine, and press down the cup and move it every time the patient feels a sting from the medicine, for they feel a sting as if by fire.
When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger. And when the stinging has passed, lift up the area of skin, and look to see if you observe the flesh raised as if it were raised by the constriction of fire or by incision. and if it is so, then all is well.
If not, then apply more medicine to the area where the medicine has not worked, until your actions are equal and your eyes focused.
Then place a piece of cloth soaked in butter over the burnt area until the heat subsides, afterwards treat the affected area with ointments called "diaphenes" and others until it is healed.
And if you need to take great care at your work that none of the medicine falls into the eyes.
And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then begin the treatment again on that spot which has been softened by the proper paper, just as you did before; after the treatment until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the mirto leaf:
And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to which you will constrain it;
And the right way is not responded to him who has studied this art.
Of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you cure a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures do not benefit, then it is necessary that you make him cautery according to this manner.
Command the patient to put his head in your lap; and let the minister hold his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor lower his head.
After, place moistened cotton wool on the egg white or in the juice of pearlwort on the eye.
After, heat the cautery which is such:
And it is hollowed out at the end like the quill of a feather, together with which is the cautery.
If you wish, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, let it be like a tent.
But nevertheless, this hollowed one is better suited for your work.
After, press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; And if it is closed, then incise it, and bring forth the head.
Upon this, place the hot iron on, and hold your hand to the iron at the part of the nose above the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and put the iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu arrives au début de la cautérisation jusqu'à l'os, ce serait bien. If not, then repeat the ironing again once, or another if you need to, and leave it for three days;
afterwards put on moistened cotton in butter, and the cure of drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass that it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
Et il y a une manière de faire la cautérisation d'une fistule que certains des anciens ont mentionnée. Attend to the fistula, and open the site; Afterwards, insert into the slit a subtle instrument shaped like this: and make it to the size of a .3. of lead; and hold your hand firmly on the instrument, and let the patient not move at all, until the melted lead runs to its end;
and it is necessary that you place on the patient's eye a cotton swab moistened in egg white or honey;
lead heals as well around the site of the fistula, and it heals wonderfully.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then one must administer a perforation in the nose, and redirect the fistula back into the body of the nose according to its own proper place.
of cracks in lips Often occur cracks in the lips which are called "poils", and similarly in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have said in sections, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small knife-shaped cautery like this:
And place it quickly in those cracks until it reaches the bottom;
afterwards, treat the site with ointment until it is healed.
When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterwards it causes putrefaction and a hole forms and it becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula. And you treat it as we have said in sections, but it does not benefit at all: Therefore, it is necessary that you use the cautery according to the size of the fistula; After the opening or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron comes to the bottom of it, and in the deepest place;
And do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
And if it is treated thus, it is good; And if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and it is of no use, then place the patient's head on your healthy side. afterward heat the cautery whose form will come hereafter in such a manner that you place a reed on the tooth;
and put the hot cautery inside hastily, and hold your hand steady so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
afterward remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will.
afterward have the patient fill his mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and spit it out.
And in this way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gum is restricted, and the corrupt moisture is dried out.
of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, And fire cautery and grease cautery.
A grease cautery is such that you take cow butter, and put it on the end of an iron or copper spoon; then take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a tent pole, and wet it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it is cooled;
and do this often until its power reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton in cold butter are moistened, and put on the aching tooth, and put hot iron on it until the fire reaches the end of the tooth.
The combined fire cautery is such that you take an iron or copper tube, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth;
After heating the cautery, which will be formed later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during this cautery, and then rinse thoroughly.
and this is the shape of the cautery:
And make a cautery from whatever material you wish, according to what you have available.
and this is the shape of the cane.
from scrofulas When the scrofula are caused by cold and moist phlegm and do not respond to digestive medicines, then heat the cautery made of that which is described below, and it should have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side.
And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it there for three days. And apply a cotton pad soaked in butter until the burn has healed;
Afterward, treat the area with onions and vinegar until it is healed.
When moisture prevails in the channels of the brain, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged with purging medicines;
Afterward, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go all the way to the throat, but only a little bit.
After that, make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavicle," of which we have the form before;
and heal the place as we have said before until it is healed.
When all and the illness of the scrotum are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the illness is old, make two cauteries on the scrotum in close places; and another cautery in the middle of the breast between the two breasts;
and let the cautery be called "clavicle" according to the form that has been said before.
And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking the entire cautery that is called "point" as the form is here before in the disease of the ears;
And let the points be up to XXX, or around it.
Après avoir traité la zone comme indiqué précédemment, utilise un cautère avec trois rangs, tel que montré dans cette figure :
Et parce que ces cautères sont plus légers, car tu en fais trois à la fois.
Quant à la dislocation de l'épaule
Et pour réunir les deux parties de l'articulation, prends une bande et fais-en un nœud double autour du cou et de l'épaule, puis attache-la au sol ou à une autre partie fixe, de sorte que le patient puisse rester immobile.  Ensuite, remets doucement l'articulation en place avec tes mains, en appliquant une légère traction.  Après cela, fais un bandage autour du cou et de l'épaule pour maintenir la stabilité. Then let the patient be made to lie on his back and on his side; then lift the heart which is inside the little hollow between the two fingers of your left hand;
and if the joint is dislocated inward, heat the cautery which has two wires like this, here is the form:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces through to the side, and there will come the figure of the cautery along with four other cauteries;
and therefore the cautery is made with the three-wire cautery, because the figures of the cauterizations are six cauteries;
and the wires are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the three-wire cautery: ️
And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, which is why there are eight cauteries.
After, place on the cautery powdered with silk; After, make the patient rest, and let the limb remain undisturbed for a long time until it is well healed.
And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the shoulder blade, or many cauteries by pricking.
Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture to the point that it alters his complexion, and he has many catarrhs, and with the usual methods of care he does not benefit, then it is necessary for the patient to be laid on his back, and extend his legs and hands.  After this, make three cauteries: one beneath the heel of the foot by the quantity of a finger, at all the cautery cavity, and two cauteries on the two sides such that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and there is enough space between one and another so that they do not join together when they exude pus;
and let the cautery be so deep that it reaches the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without alteration:
And if you see one being cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
and he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at this point according to the amount that you see in advance; then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "point".
After the treatment of the previous treatment, until it is healed.
When concerning the liver, pain comes from cold and moisture and great flatulence, so much that it is strongly displaced from its natural complexion due to excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in sections, and it does not benefit him at all, so it is necessary that the patient be seated on his heels; keit And mark three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, beyond the hypochondria, there where the ribs of the man come.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger. And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery;
And only burn half of the head, and let the patient be upright on his feet.
And if he cannot, then let him be lying down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms;
And if it is your intention, then cauterize these cauteries with the knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and be careful not to burn the entire head, for you would dry out the whole body. And let it not come up to a boil, for the heart is very sensitive in that place, and you should know this well.
When there is an abscess on the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not very strong;
and if it is in the membrane, then the pain is insane.
And at that time when this treatment was done by the physicians, it was necessary for the patient to be placed on his head;
and then sign the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a grape, for this is its shape: And burn with a cautery until the heart is burned, and reach up to the navel, so that the entire abdomen is emptied.
after the treatment according to the treatment of the excrement, so that he may be healed;
and it is not fitting that anyone use this cautery except those who have studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and through whom many of these diseases have been cured at some time.
Then he can work boldly, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
The fire cautery
The ancients said that one should make for pleurisy cauteries from the roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristolochia, the longest you can find, and let it be dry, as thick and as long as your finger; And place it in oil, and grasp it with fire, and apply a cautery between the collarbone and the neck, and two small cauteries a little below in the area under the chin.
And two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, slanting backward a little. And one cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the ribs of the chest on either side of the cautery that is between the shoulders.
And do not press with your hand, but make it openly as if smelling.
And some ancients said that some men use a cautery similar to a razor, and heat it and insert it between the ribs until it reaches that abscess. And the pain jumps out, as we have said in the liver abscess.
But in this work there is fear that the patient may die now, or a fistula will occur which cannot be healed.
of the urine
When you treat the urinary disease as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three methods of cautery that are all good.
The type of which one is such that you should make three cauteries, or four, aligning according to the length of the muscle, following the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before;
And do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be seated on his back;
And another type of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two irons, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
And lift the chest that is near the muscle, or the rib of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the chest be according to the chest, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After he cuts out the two inflamed nerves so that the heart is pierced from the other side, then draw forth from the cautery, and thus there will be four of them.
And if you see this, cauterize the entire cautery with three nerves.
After the treatment when he has had pus for a long time, and this is different from the other treatments mentioned before.
Cautery is not useful for those with dropsy, except in the manner called "ascites".
When you cure according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the abdomen, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the bladder, two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; And let the cautery be very close to the tip of the heart.
Afterwards leave the cautery open for a long time to expel corruption, and do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; And healing would hasten, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the claw that we have shown before; And the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it is placed here before.
When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish bile, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; And lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
And do not enter too deeply; thus, it would burn beyond the desired area. Let the cauterization be according to this form:
Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the little toe; And let the long cautery be one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
And let the cauteries heal over for a long time without curing, as the wound heals.
After the cure of other wounds that we have spoken about.
When diarrhea comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by usual methods of treatment; And if you see the patient in good health and of strong virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before concerning the stomach cautery, and also apply a circular cautery. And four subtle cauteries around the navel, each one a subtle lancet cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, perform cautery on the armpit, and one cautery on each eye, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
of the cure for hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and they are old and of thick, cold, and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said by division, and it does not benefit, then make cauteries. Three on the spine of the back, those which are entirely below the anus, little by little in a triangle, and one cautery below the buttocks two fingers wide.
And if you think his stomach is chilled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then one should make one large cautery on the stomach, as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the bladder with all the cauteries slanting. And let the cauterization remain open for a long time. After curing the place until it is healed.
When you cut the throat, heat the cautery which resembles a razor, and then place it completely ignited on that slit throat; and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that the blood stops;
do this once or twice, and if there is much throat slit, then cauterize each one as we have said; after curing with beneficial ointments until they are healed;
and if you cauterize with a large cautery on varicose veins, it will be more helpful.
When the patient cannot tolerate cutting or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then such a disease occurs that cannot be cured except by cautery.
When a fistula comes to someone, and it is inflamed and emits foul-smelling pus and corrupt moisture, you should probe it with a very fine tent, and ensure that you know the depth of the entire tent.
After heating the cautery which resembles a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tumor has entered, and renew the cautery until that rotten and corrupt flesh is burned, once or twice or three times, depending on what is needed;
And take care not to cut the nerves that are within, and of large veins.
if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not make these incisions except in a fleshy place, and think that it is not persistent;
after healing the place until it is healed, and if the place is old, and the material has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed;
and if the materials are not removed, know that the place is too deep, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and so with one of those which we will discuss in its proper place.
When pain comes from the kidneys due to great flatulence and a woman does not desire sex, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the same cauterizing tool we mentioned before.
And if we make the cautery in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will provide greater help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the opposite side of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, one to the right and one to the left, and each cautery should be as long as the length of a thumb.
And if you perform the cautery on the back, or two, if you need it.
And let the cautery be flat according to the shape previously mentioned.
When the womb is cold and moist, and it does not allow conception for this reason, and the flowers are corrupt and their ends delayed; And when they come, there is great pain: Then it is necessary that one makes three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the treatment of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back.
And let the cautery be flat, as we have said.
When the moist and viscous humors descend to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
And the place of separation is found visible, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip bone with a circular cautery, and mark before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is inside the circle.
And let the cautery be such as that used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then make three large olive-sized cauteries, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the hearts.
And care for it until it heals.
of hip pain When pain comes in the hip bone, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated for this as we have said in the treatment, and the treatment does not work, and the disease is chronic. Then it is necessary that you purge the patient of foul-smelling pills or other good similar pills containing thick humors. Afterwards, perform a cautery on him;
and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Fire cautery is according to many methods, one of which is as follows:
that you cauterize on the pelvis of the hip III triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them deep and large, and let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cautery be olive-shaped.
sometimes a cautery is made in the middle on the top of the hip, for which there are IV according to this form:
And if you see it, then cauterize with the circular cautery that we have previously mentioned in the case of hip dislocation;
but do it in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the flesh of the joint is burned.
And this is the manner in which one proceeds with sciatica, when the pain is located in the hip and does not reach as far as the thigh or the leg.
And if it goes as far as the thigh and leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is located, and one cautery above the ankle, four fingers wide, a little to the left side;
and let the cautery be a sharp one, and burn the thickness of the joint.
and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two feet or near there, then cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four with the cautery called "point". And if necessary, do more of them;
And if the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery with a knife or a circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries not to leave the cautery so that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and do not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the entire leg was swollen, as well as the foot, and all the foot was pierced and corrupt. After a treatment for a stomach ailment from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, which is thus: make such an iron and let it be at the tip as thick as a nail from a thumb, or somewhat less, and let it be serrated and let there be between each serration the width of a pea;
And the hooks shall have two parts, and they shall also be like needles, and there should be one handle of well-made iron.
and this is its form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, and then place it on the thigh of the sick person, and turn it over on the healthy side.
And cauterize once with the cautery, and leave it for three days. And then make a poultice of butter, and let the wound remain open for a long time. After treating with ointment until it is healed.
Al-Bukhari said that we use the cautery rarely because of the fear of its gaze, and if we see anyone using it,
And yet this is of the good cauteries, which one can bear, and there where it is appropriate.
The cautery of burning medicine is such that you should make the instrument with tines, on which descends the margin of the opening, and it should be of bronze or iron with one long side, and at the height it should have two noses, and between each there should be the width of a finger; And they should be open from below and above, and joined together according to this form:
Afterward, place the box of the hip on the patient lying on his sound side, and then press your hand very high up on the hip bone; Afterward, place between the two circles of the awl hot iron that has been heated in the fire one bag [of powder], and let it stay for an hour, and the patient should bear the heat and burning of it.
For there is burning as if by fire;
And when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently raise the hip, leaving it so for three days, and then apply butter until the blackness of the burn is removed. And leave it there for three days to allow for drainage of pus.
And that would be the last aid after the treatment with onions until it is healed.
And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, then make an instrument that is soft in the same way as you have done on the hip similarly;
And this is the manner of applying heat, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine. Take quicklime and live coal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot. Or if there is a small opening outside where the tip of a razor can enter.
Or if there is a small opening outside where the tip of a razor can enter. And put another well-leaded pot on top of it, and put powdered alkali and chalk and sweet alum on top, so that there are two layers of powders above the razor blade when you have taken hold of it in your hand.
And leave it like this until the water descends and reaches the bottom of the leaded pot, then take all that water and pour it onto chalk and alkali as before.
And then it will be very pure and can be used in many medical works and for other members' cauteries.
For it does the same work as fire, and there are other medicines with which one can cauterize the hip well, such as castor, anacardium honey, and chalk mixed together with soap.
And Galen tells us of a cure by which a man was healed of the pain in the hip and the sciatic vein, and he praises it greatly, saying that no other cure was done, and that he was cured with one treatment when this cure was done, and he bathed as instructed hereafter.
And says in this manner that you take fresh and dry litharge, and grind it very well with a little fat, and place it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it.
And leaves it for three hours, by which time the patient should no longer feel the burning sensation.
And then have him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed, and put him to bed, and all the pain will go away and he will be cured.
Et sachez que nul ne doit user de cautère de telles médecines, si ce n'est après l'évacuation du corps.
And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps greatly.
and the cautery should be done in this manner. Take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it on the hollow that is between the big toe of the foot and the other one called phalanx.
Afterwards, take dry goat hair, and hold it in the fire until it becomes coal, and put it on wool, and leave it until it is stained.
and do so again, and do not stop doing this until you think by your sense that it reaches the hip, and that the pain is stopped.
And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of cheese".
of back pain
When pain comes to the back, either from falling or striking or too great an evacuation, or from the appearance of cold matter spreading, in none of these cases is it worthwhile to use cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary that, after the patient has been purged with foul-smelling pills or other similar substances, three lines of incense should be made on their back where the pain is located, and in each line place five cauteries or more, depending on the strength and quantity that the patient can endure;
and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "point";
and if you wish, make three or four cauteries in the middle of the nail-shaped cautery according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow gait when they rise, and fear; And you will find at the end of the spine on the back, and it appears on top of other spines.
When you see this and you wish to cure it, then you cauterize it with the cautery of celce according to this form. So that the cautery penetrates each part of the spine evenly.
And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery two or three lines long, and let the points be close to each other.
After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery to a swollen place that is in pain from nerves.
Of the pain of the joints
When pain in the joints is due to moisture that spreads throughout each limb of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which doctors call "podagra," and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this manner:
make many cauterizations around the foot joint, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the surface of the foot, make a cautery at the point called "point". And if the pain reaches the knees and other joints, which often happens, then make three or four cauterizations on each knee from every side, with each cautery being olive-shaped.
And if you need more, do more, but do not keep your hand on it longer than the iron rod is hot.
Et si les douleurs descendent jusqu'au genou et au dos, administrez-lui la cautérisation que nous avons mentionnée dans ce chapitre.
And if the pain is in the hands, make an incision around the wrist two lines long;
and if there remains any pain in the fingers, then make an incision on each joint and on the back of the hand;
And if the pain reaches up to the ribs or up to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and give them medicine.
Et car si vous prenez bien soin de lui et que vous purgez la fièvre, il sera guéri avec l'aide de Dieu.
When ulcers occur in the anus, and feces descend into the testicles, which is new, then it is necessary that when you see it cured, he does not eat anything that day; And instruct him to use things that cause flatulence, so that his feces descend from his stomach.
Then make him sit on his back between your hands, and command that he hold his thighs until the testicles descend, and bring them to your fingers, and sign below the pubic bone on the wrist bone, and let it be similar to half a circle above the body.
Then heat the cautery which has this form:
until it is white and throws sparks. Then return the testicles to their place; And let the attendant hold his hand so that they do not return back;
And bandage the patient's thighs well and place a pillow and a bolt of cloth on his thighs, and another on the penis which he holds with his hands;
Then place the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and firmly until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then begin again another time until you reach the bone. and be careful that the bubble does not burst when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that the patient may not die from this or suffer other harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
And it is necessary for the cautery of children to be fine according to their measure, and also large for adults according to their measure.
after three days, cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is removed.
after curing it with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days so that the wound may heal well.
And it is necessary that its caregivers be weary for a long time, so that the boils do not break out when he tries to go into rooms.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, let a well-made sling be placed on him, and he should wear it for another forty days.
And let him have good rest, working little and guarding against excessive drinking and eating, and against excessively loud laughter.
And when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
When ulcers come in other places and are recognized, and you see that they no longer grow, make a second cautery according to its size, and burn one-third of the heart. after the treatment according to what we have said;
and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-pointed cautery like this:
but first mark the place and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and then hold your hand in the middle of the entire cauterization tool.
But the first cautery is lighter and more delicate.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and strength and location of twists and its pain.
if it is healed from the first cautery, that is good;
if this is not the case, commence another cautery on top of it, for such is the custom that it should move to the nearest limb, therefore you must perform the cauteries until the patient is healed.
The messengers are sometimes helped by cautery with great aid, and likewise the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
When you see it being cauterized, beware if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not move or remain, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: I pierce in the crown towards the back of the head, and one on each of the two temples, and one behind on the occiput.
and you leave it until your hand is soaked with the cautery reaching the bone, and enough to bring out the scabs so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape.
and cauterize over the bridge of the nose accordingly as it is described before.
And if the disorder is spread everywhere; and it is manifestly deteriorating, then you must cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned on the head, one cautery below the nose, two on the spine of the neck, six on the spine of the back, one large one on the buttocks and another beside it, and two on each shoulder. ︎ And there are two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
And beware of the nerves that are under the heel, lest you burn them;
And sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more cauteries I make, the more help I provide, and it brings him benefit;
And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy ones do, because his body is already completely corrupt.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find them in the manner of irons.
After treatment, dust the place with flour of vetch mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
When swelling comes to some member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness.
And let the cautery be a little bit inside the thickness of the heart; then the curing of onions until they are healed.
And sometimes the cautery is done on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed;
however, let no one interfere with it unless he is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
When the disease called "albaras" is healed, and medical remedies have no effect on it, then it should be cauterized with a small, deep cautery, according to the thickness of the heart, until the paleness is removed and its color changes.
then the remedy of flour from chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a pigeon and almonds, one part each; and all should be mixed together, and tied with a cloth, and placed on the wound until it heals.
The cure of cancer by cautery
When cancer first appears and you see it spreading, then cauterize it with the cautery that resembles a circle, all around the cancer.
And nevertheless, the wise say that one should also apply cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
and yet this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupt, and I have seen it happen before.
and a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around the edge with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is delayed in death due to the excess of its production or the weakness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the time; And you see that it hastens death: Then cauterize around it with many small cauteries, pricking. Afterward leave it thus. For she will hasten to die.
And if you see her pierce with all the cautery, then heat the cautery as follows:
And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it outside in such a way that the course of the corruption is made clear.
After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
There is another manner of disease which is called "corrodens," and is nothing other than a gnawing away of the limbs, for it gnaws at the limbs just as fire does with dry logs.
If you see this disease in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire together, then heat the cauteries very small and large, according to what is necessary for the place where the disease is.
After that, cauterize it from all sides so that you burn away all the corruption and nothing remains of it, except that everything which is corrupt be removed.
And then leave it for three days, and put on the places that have been cauterized a poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
After the treatment of tumors producing flesh.
And if you see after three days that no hair grows, it is good;
and if not, then repeat the cautery on the spot where the corruption remains.
And this condition has sometimes been treated with astringent medicine instead of fire cautery;
but nonetheless, fire cautery is more effective, and I have already described the treatment with astringent medicine in the section on wounds. take it when you need it.
of leeks that grow at the feet Often it happens that at the feet, on the outside, a disease grows which is called "clots" according to our intention, and it is a large hairy thing that wounds the foot.
And the cautery for this disease is in two ways. That is to say, cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
Fire cautery is that you heat the cautery as if it were a goose feather, and let it be made of good iron to the extent that it can fit the nail on all sides, and let there be subtle edges.
After, place everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the head of the nail. And leave it thus for three days until it begins to emit pus; Then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with vinegar, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its base.
Then treat the burn site by applying ointment until it is healed.
And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery; and it is done in this manner: take a reed of copper or iron, or a goose quill, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, on warts; And put the candle on top so that it drips all around, then place a cloth of warm water there, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the candle comes to the base of the nail, and let the hot water find its deep way until the root;
and let the patient endure a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted from all its roots.
So do one after another, until you remove all those that are on the body, then treat the swellings that produce flesh.
When someone trembles from cold of the nerves, or from tertian fever or another, then you must make four cauteries or five on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; And for cautery on the foot, and above the stomach for the liver cautery;
let it tremble, and the health of the cold illness will hasten.
Sometimes appear on the surface of the body washed with water, or stinking pustules, which come from large corrupted substances.
so it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, whose point is taken from the fire, or of long aristolochia root, or for the lenticular cautery.
And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow from then on, but the excesses from which they come are broken down, and they heal;
but it must be done after blood evacuation.
Many times there is a great loss of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound on the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the member, and similar things; And it is very serious to stop it.
And yet when this happens to anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the blood is quiet under your finger, and no more drops come out;
then heat several small and large olive cauteries in the fire until they are all red;
then take one, large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is stopped.
And if it spurts when you remove your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not stop doing one after another until the blood is drawn out;
and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be stopped well, especially if the artery is large, except by one of the four methods that we have mentioned; or by cauterization, or by extracting it if it has not been cut, or by tightly binding with a thread, or by applying medications that have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and bound properly.
Whoever manages this will use a tight bandage of cloth or place burning objects on it, or similar things, if it is not beneficial or possible otherwise.
And if this happens to someone and they have no physician or medicine at hand, then they should place their thumb over the wound of the vein as we have said, and press down firmly until it is stopped on the wound and on the vein; And do not move the finger, but moisten it with very cold water often until it is very cold and the skin is frozen and swollen and stiff.
And make inquiries about what he needs for cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all about the disease for which one should cauterize with fire or burning medication, and the occasions and causes and instruments and forms of cautery;
and I have placed this chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that one may more easily find what one wants.
And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one concerning cautery, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in the work of this chapter there is often evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake foolishness. For many types of people come for treatment. if they are of such a nature that they will die quickly from their illness due to the madness it causes and the severity of its harm; and one should fear them.
And there are some who give you their reason and say: “wait, I am cured.” and the illness is disdainful.
It is not appropriate for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but rather put more consideration into your honor than your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely concerning that which you are certain of, and from which you can gain respect and praise.
and use prognosis and diagnosis in treating your patients so that health may be restored;
and this will help you acquire a good reputation, glory, and fame.
Very dear son, may our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Now I have arranged this chapter for you by chapters, according to what is in the previous chapter on cautery, which I have discussed with you from head to toe, so that you can find more easily what you will need.
Know that this illness often afflicts children during birth, and when the midwife pulls too hard on the child's head;
and sometimes it occurs due to an unknown cause, about which we know nothing.
And I have never seen this illness except in children, and for all those that I have seen, death was imminent; and therefore it seems to me that I should leave the work of treating such cases alone.
And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled each day so much that it could no longer hold it; ‌
And so much moisture gathered that he died, and this moisture is collected beneath the bone on the rib, between the heart and the bone.
And the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should cut a wide slit into the head.
And it should be as long as two fingers, until the moisture has drained.
And see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs are that you see the seams of the head open on each side, and the water jumps out strongly when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: then you must cut three slits into the head in this manner:
And after the incision, remove all the moisture. After bandaging the cuts with rags and powders, apply wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
Then unbind it, and treat the wound with tentes and dressings, and let the head be bandaged evenly, and then give the patient dry food of little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is that you consider where the greatest part of the abscess appears, and the accumulation of pus;
for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Cut then where the abscess appears, and the accumulation of pus, and make the incision according to your ability;
And see that you do not cut the artery; and a vein flows with blood, so that the patient dies from bleeding and moisture loss.
When someone has a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or nose, and the illness is longstanding, and medical treatment does not help, then the final cure is to use cautery, with which two arteries will be cut.
Therefore, when you see him cut, it is necessary that the patient lean his head back; after which you rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient strain his neck against the entire cloth; then look where the veins beat, and the place of one and the other is after the ears, and a few are returned;
then mark the places thus, then cut one and the other with a sharp spatula of two parts, so that the incised vein reaches to the bone, and this should be along the width of the head.
And if you see, push the spatula under the vein and cut above it, cutting also as two halves across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood constantly spurts out.
And if the artère does not open to the touch, then you must measure the width of three fingers, then take a saw and cut down to the bone;
and what is needed of the blood let out is six-tenths, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery;
then observe the wound: if there remains on the bone no trace of pus, then shave it clean so that no such abscess may come; then constrain the wound and bind it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
of headache When an ancient headache comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old foolishness and similar things, and he is treated by various methods of medicine and all this does not benefit him at all, then we will extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have said.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient must pull back the hair from his temples and aim for the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is little hidden outside except in certain men who are too cold;
And if it is inflamed, let the patient constrict his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with some rough cloth, and rinse the area with hot water until the veins appear clearly; Then take the spatula which is shaped like this: Then peel off the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up with the tweezers, and make sure it is well separated from the tissues underneath each part;
And if the artery is thin, then wind it around the tip of the hook, and cut off that part according to the size of the two fingers. For if it is not cut, then the blood will not come out at all.
And draw blood for six times, until three.
And if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the healing of the wound, and let the blood flow gradually;
Then cut the superfluous tissue that is between the two ligaments at that very moment, and then, if you see fit, apply the cautery with the knife until the bone.
And this is a good work, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm constitution. For the cautery helps to dry up the moisture: Therefore, it is of greater help to moists.
Where for the extraction of arteries one should fill the place with old cotton and put on well-made bandages.
And when they are unbound, then they should be cured with dry medicines that promote healing and with bandages, until they are healed.
And if you cut the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten with the copper by cautery, or apply vitriol to the place and hold it in your hand so that the blood is staunched. And if you do not have this (vitriol) present, then place your finger on the spot until the blood is frozen, and rinse the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it as needed.
And there should be one finger's width of space between the two knives, and then when you have inserted the two blades, place the burning iron on it until it reaches the bone, and cut the wound in two places. And they should be separated between the two heads because they are not fused by this cautery at all.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And that which is better and lighter in the extraction of the artery is for you to cauterize the wound with this cutting cautery from two sides, but let the cuts be well spaced to maintain their heat longer. Car when the instrument is too blunt, it holds less heat.
tears When tears fall from the eyes and descend into the veins that are on the temple of the head, and medicinal treatment does not help at all, and you see the patient's face redden, and they feel a throbbing sensation in their forehead as if trembling; And if the eyes are pale and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids have fallen out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, then this treatment is needed. And the ancients called it "treatment for concussion", and what you must do is to cut off the hairs that the patient has on their forehead, then make three incisions in the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead;
And the ancients called it "treatment for concussion", and what you must do is to cut off the hairs that the patient has on their forehead, then make three incisions in the forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be like the two that are all in the forehead from top to bottom until the nape, and the other two on the ribs above the breasts, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on the sides above the breasts.
and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be three fingers wide across.
and have prepared a piece of sponge and many cloths for wiping away the blood, then pour in the sharpened instrument from two parts where this form is:
from the incision which is in front of the temple up to the second incision. and scrape all the skin that is between the two incisions to the full thickness on top of the bone, then do the same from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then withdraw this instrument strongly. Place in the first cut the instrument called “scraper,” which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, and this is its shape:
And put the sharp side towards the flesh of the heart, and the soft side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle cut.
And cut all the vessels descending from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to what opens from the heart, and then make another cut in the middle of the split until the other defect.
And then draw out the blood equally, and press on the place for the blood taken;
Then put in each split a tent of old cotton, and put on wet cloths with wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure that no abscess comes there;
And on the third day untie the bandage, and apply a large compress of boiled water, then treat with ointment of basil and rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds, until it is healed.
When to some people comes acute catarrh usually, and you see the eyes watery and small, and weakening the sight, and the eyelids burned; and the hair falls out, and on the head there is intense pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these signs that those matters and that catarrh come only from many veins, and the best treatment for it is this:
And it is that you instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a great incision in the middle of the forehead, and another from the left eye. And begin from the cleft of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move during eating;
and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then dry between the two lips of the cleft and put in old cotton wool and linen cloths; then lay upon him moistened cloths in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess;
when it is removed, then you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that cause the flesh to grow.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it; and administer it to these wounds to promote flesh growth throughout.
Of ear blockage
All that falls into the ears is one of four things: or grain, or animal, or mineral stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; When something flows like water and is easy and similar things.
When something falls into the ear that does not belong there and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
If you see the stone, then drip some violet oil or sesame oil onto it, and then perform an extraction. And make him sneeze with a stimulant, and plug his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and stretch the ear upward.
Often this cure is successful;
and if it does not succeed, then apply an extraction with fine tweezers, of which the form is this:
If it comes out well with the tweezers, that is good;
if not, then apply an extraction with a fine hook of small size;
And if it does not jump out by itself, then make a tube of brass and insert the end of the tube into the opening of the ear firmly, and stopper that which is around the tube with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter along with the tube; then pull strongly on the tube, for often it comes out as we have said;
and if it does not come out in this manner, then take the birdlime with which birds are caught, and put some on a suitable instrument for this purpose, and put a little cotton around it; then press the birdlime onto the foreign object or whatever it may be, and pull strongly.
And if it does not jump out from all these things that we have said, then you should hasten to cut open the ear before a hot abscess and spasm arrive there;
and the manner of the incision is that you first anoint the patient with cephalic, and let out blood according to its measure of virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn their ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fatty place where it depends; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it as best you can, and suck on it hastily to your mouth;
and the treatment until he is healed.
And if it is grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction.
and if it cannot come out, then administer the subtle, gentle sputum according to this form: and make an incision for that grain.
But do not do this when you think the grain is wet due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces.
then strain it through fine sieves and press, as we have said, so that the extraction may be clear.
In the case of water falling into the ear, it is necessary that the patient first use sneezing condiments, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same side where the water is. If she jumps through the roof, it is good.
if not, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb, light and thin, and heat them a little over the fire; and place the patient in a kneeling position with one knee under his ear, and have him stand on his other foot, and strike another stone over the stone that is in the ear. and do not stop striking stone after stone until all the water comes out, and thus it jumps out completely;
And if you see it, take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and set the other end on fire until the larger part of the reed is burned.
Then do the same with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about stones.
In extracting the creature, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
but if it is of large body that can be felt, then use a puncture for extraction; and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of worms stuck in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not work, then you must look at the ear to the sun. Si il y a des vers, retire-les avec des pinces fines. Et s'il n'y en a pas, prends le couteau pour faire une incision.
And let it be narrow below and wide above. Et mettez délicatement le bout le plus fin dans l'oreille, en fonction de la tolérance du patient à la douleur, puis tirez fortement tout le couteau. Faites cela plusieurs fois jusqu'à ce que tous les vers sortent.
Et s'ils ne veulent pas sortir, bourrez autour du couteau avec du coton, comme je l'ai dit pour la pierre.
Et s'ils ne sortent pas comme nous l'avons dit, administrez des distillations que les anciens ont prouvées pour tuer les vers. Vous trouverez comment préparer ces distillations dans le traitement des distillations.
And so drip your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which here is the form as you see. And whether it be of silver or bronze, it should have a small hole at the bottom and an opening on top to drip through.
And to press the distillation inside, use an instrument of bronze well-made for this purpose. And if you wish, take a scraper and wrap tightly around its point with cotton. Then cast your oil or juice, and whatever you wish of your medicines into the reed, and let the reed be in the ear.
Then insert the scraper with all the cotton inside, and press your hand gently until the oil is dripped into the depth of the ear. And let the patient feel within him, and let there be the distilled juice in a heated pot over the fire before it is dropped into the ear; And ensure that it is not too cold, for then the medicine would not be as good.
Of ear blockage
No child is born without a small opening in the ears;
and the same thing happens to men due to the obstruction of a wound or growing flesh within the ear, and this obstruction sometimes goes deep into the ear, so that it cannot be seen;
And sometimes the pot overflows through the opening, and one can see it clearly.
That which goes deep within and cannot be seen is difficult to treat in many ways. And that which one can see must be placed in the sunlight by the patient; and look inside: if you see the hair obvious, then do all this operation with this instrument of which here is the form:
And let it be sharp and cutting both in front and behind completely, so that it does not wound the ear;
if the hair is of flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and cut lightly until all that flesh is removed.
And if the hair has grown deep into the ear, take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it on the cartilage of the ear.
If you feel the hair of which the patient feels pain when hearing, prick lightly and take care not to harm the nerves of the ear;
then place in the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment. Pour ce remède, fais cela chaque jour jusqu'à ce que la plaie soit guérie: prends une étoffe et trempe-la dans de l'eau de rose, puis saupoudre dessus du vitriol broyé.
And if you see the ear swelling, it is necessary to remove that cloth and replace it with another cloth moistened in a salve made of rose oil and wax until the swelling disappears. Then continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if bleeding continues, soak a sponge in cold water and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding, which are discussed in the treatment of distillations.
This ulcer, which comes on the eyelids when they are moist and then dry, you must extend it with tweezers and scissors, and cut it off with a spatula from its roots. Then place vitriol powder on the spot.
And if it comes off, then cauterize with a subtle lenticular cautery, and afterward cauterize the incision in order to move (it).
and often they return, as long as something remains of their root; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burnt and do not come back.
of the hail Often in the eyes there come things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason this illness is called "hailstone," and it is a collection of thick moisture above and below the eyelid. The workings are such:
The workings are such: watch if the hailstone moves from one place to another, and this is easy to know.
Wound it then broadly, then gently scrape each part, then take it with tongs, and cut it off.
if you cannot cut it without slightly piercing the skin, it will not harm the patient;
and if the split is large, join it with a stitch, and treat it until it heals;
and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, for the ointment will restore it quickly and promote flesh growth.
And if the sty is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the skin, and hold the sty with tongs, and cut it off while pressing on both sides.
and if the skin is separated by the incision, it will not harm anything;
And when hail is struck, lift the eye with salt water, and heal the place of it which injures flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes Exinach is a fat that is inflamed in the membranes of the eyelids, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it greatly harms their eyes, and catarrh comes to them in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes;
and therefore they always lie on their faces, and sleep with them swollen, and their eyelids are moist beneath their eyelashes where the inflammation and appearance cover the exinach that appears in the eye. And when you press the place between your fingers and feel the exinach there.
And the manner of the work is such that the patient places his head in your hand;
And then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains each part, then place it on him; And press with your two hands from both sides, so that the parts are assembled within the circle;
Then in the middle of the moisture make with a sharp scalpel an incision wide enough, but not larger than the wound that is made for venesection;
And pierce the skin thoroughly until you reach the parts; And in various positions pus comes out of the incision, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Pull it out then all at once with a piece of cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out.
And make sure you do not push into the slit, so that you do not reach all the way to the eye and injure it.
And if the sty does not open at the beginning of the slit, then slightly widen the slit until it opens.
Then pull it out as we have said, then wet the cloth in vinegar and water, and place on the spot, and bind with bandages.
And there are such men who grind salt and place it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Then heal the patient until he is cured.
And if it comes to the place of a hot abscess, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is cured.
of the hairs of the papers When hairs grow on the eyelids that are not natural, and they become irritated, they harm the eyes and bring about various diseases such as constant tears and softening of the eyelids and pus, so much so that it leads to the loss of sight.
And the treatment is according to four ways: Or by fire cautery together with fire, or by medicinal water according to what was said in the previous chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by chains, as I will say.
You must place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the eyelid of the eye to your left hand;
If it is turned inside out, that is good; If not, then insert a needle all the way to its eye; And let it be near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow near these hairs, and draw the thread all the way through the eyelid, and turn it to the razor.
Then they make an incision in the part below the skin, under the hairs, covering all the flesh, from the large tear duct to the small one.
Then they pull out a thread, and place under the skin a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the skin a figure of ink, such as the leaf of myrtle, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you wish to raise the skin that is divided into all.
And for those who need it, cut a large quantity of the skin according to how the skin is softened.
Then they make an incision along all the flesh on the two lines you have marked, and begin from the large tear duct down to the small one. And let one of the clefts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then apply oil to one of the two corners of the heart, then scrape it all off.
Then join the two lips together with a seam of one thread of fine wool, and wipe away the blood, and let the excess of the threads dry on the two corners with any sticky substance, if you wish to do this.
And if not, then pay no heed, but leave the seam and the threads for three or four days;
Then treat the wound without seam with dry and astringent substances, for the skin revives at the healing of the wound and its union, but the seam is harmful (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear. And there is another way:
And there is another way: and it is that you should mark the paper with a shape like the leaves of myrtle, as we have described, in three empty spaces according to the form that is here:
then cut the one that surmounts the small equal forces according to the form that is here
And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread near the large eye, and the second thread near the small one, and bring together between your fingers the threads equally;
then raise your hand equally, and lift all the leather on which you have marked, as we have described, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is healed;
And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar calming ointment;
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the skin is converted:
then you should use what we have said about incision;
but the sewing in one and the other is more technical.
The treatment of dogs is as follows: and it is that you convert the skin and open it inside as I have said, then make two dogs with skill, and two fine threads as long as the length and width of the spatula is; and cut off the ends of the thread in two parts where you hold the threads; etime la cure est moult bele, et moult prodoment faite.
Then carefully bring together the two parts above the papillary layer of the eye, and firmly pull on the two canthi from the two sides. And leave it this way for some days, and the skin that is pulled will die and blacken and rot, until it falls off on its own.
If it delays, then give it some strength, then treat it until it is healed.
And when the wound is healed and the papillary layer has been lifted, then the hairs will no longer grow.
And these are the shapes of the two canthi that you should make according to this figure and according to this measure in length and width.
The procedure is such that you take a fine needle, and insert one thread of soft and fine silk into it. Then gather the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the thread be a palm long.
then order in the sheath another thin silk thread briefly, and tie the heads of the thread;
then have the patient place his head in your hand.
and let it be near the sun so that the work may be illuminated, for this is a subtle and small operation. Then push the needle all the way into the sheath at the root of the hair, and make it pierce the skin quickly until you draw it out above the natural hair.
then pull the hair until it reaches the sheath, and push into the sheath that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
Then pull your hand until the hairs come out completely from the skin with the natural hair.
And if the skin is stretched and the hair does not come out completely, you will draw the skin down to the bottom of the thread that you have placed there, so that the skin comes out from the opening above and that you can see it with your eye.
Then draw the skin and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows.
And if the hair is small, accompany it with one long natural hair from the head, and raise it with that one until it is lengthened, then remove it.
of the infection of the eye When this disease called "aleacrati" or purulent infection comes to the eye, there are two types.
one natural, and the other unnatural.
And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from cutting, or from cautery, and similar things.
And the way to work on it is that you split open that union, and undo its lips, and put inside linen tentings, and let it rest until it heals.
And it is not necessary to use in the cure of it things that dry out and restrict. Because if you do this, the disease returns worse than before;
but working with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the juice of water or ale and flaxseed boiled together, and melted onion in some oil, and wrap it in a tenting, and treat it thus.
And the treasure of your care is such that you must take caution that it does not heal in a manner different from what it was before;
and these works that we have spoken of are not outside of the remedies for this ailment, so that it may heal according to its original form.
This illness which is below and is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
The accident comes from wounds and cuts and burns and similar things;
and the way to perform this operation is such that you take a needle with a double thread, and insert the point into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left margin as far as the right, so that the thread comes out in two places in the flesh;
then press the flesh down over the entire needle, and cut it to a wide spatula. And if the shape of the stone returns as it should be, this is good;
if not, then take a razor and place it in the crack, turn the stone, and make two cracks on the inside of the stone;
and the heads of the two cracks should be at the two corners of the cut that you have made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which is called "I Greek";
then remove that piece, according to the quantity that its sides are sharp underneath, from what follows the stone, then join the two separated parts and sew them together with a thread of wool;
then care of what we have said about softening medicines, and tents, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a cut or stitching or cautery, then you must make a clean cut under the skin of the paper, according to what is said before. Then sever between the two lips of a tent, as I have said;
Then sever between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one should perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares an engine with all his power how he may bring back the figure to its natural form;
and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for him in work and instruments, in many situations.
When this joining occurs in such a way that the skin on top is joined with the white of the eye, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a razor beneath the skin, and lift it up.
and stretch it with pincers, until you cut off what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or cutting, so that the patient cannot tolerate the spatula being too sharp hurting the eye.
and let your incision, by which you peel off that assembly, be light, so that the skin returns to its natural shape.
and all that assembly is healed, and sometimes the eye becomes inflamed with salt water, and lift it with fresh water, and with honey.
Then place a linen bandage between the paper and the eye, and put plenty of wet wool on top of the eye. And after three days, use cold compresses and astringents until he is healed.
Know that the nail is according to two kinds: the first is nervous and similar to hard stone, and the other is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and one tries to take it with pincers, no one can.
And both resemble the growth beginning towards the large tear duct and grows little by little until it covers the entire eye and all its light and movement.
And the manner of the incision is such that the patient places his head in your lap, then closes his eyes. and lifts the paper to your hand, then winds the nail around small forceps, and stretches it upwards. then take a needle, and put a horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair in it, and the thread strongly. and double the point of the needle a bit and insert it into the nail, and pierce through the entire nail, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it upwards, and peel off all the skin on the side of the nail that follows the fingertip and the silk along the hair down to the root, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with all the delicate spatula and small forceps, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct, so that through the incision the body does not usually come to tears.
And sometimes the nails extend to the fingertips, and to the thread, as we have said. Then scrape off all the soft part from which this form comes:
And be sure that the soft part does not touch the flesh and tear it, and that the wound is not pierced.
And after the incision, put in the wound a little bit of crushed salt and from the vitriol made of lead, and leave it until the next day. Then treat this until it is healed as needed.
And if the nail is not fleshy and you cannot insert the needle, and the fingertip cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail can be cured with medicine.
And they are born like I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, work the eye of the patient, and take a small knife with a sharp point according to this form: And lift the nail gently on top, and if you see that it does not thin out at all and the reason presses there, then drip from your mouth into the eye a collyrium made of lead oxide and red collyrium, ground together, and plug the eye until the next day;
If nothing is against you in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then let it be, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Then resume the other work according to this same procedure, until it is all removed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear duct clouds the eye with great annoyance, then suspend it to the upper eyelid, and cut off a part of it but not all, so that tears do not come into it;
then pour into the eye red choleric [substance] made from lead.
In the eyes of some men there sometimes appears red flesh, and it covers the pupil and extends onto the eyelids, and it turns outwards, and it resembles a rosette of a baluster.
and the work is such that the patient should place his head in your lap, then you should open the eyes, and all this flesh is collected into suitable receptacles, and it is sustained with force.
then cut the first flesh, and continue cutting everything down to the end with the razor, and be careful not to damage the eye in this work.
and let the incision of the [instrument] that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and in small forces from which one removes the splinter be as described after this chapter shows it.
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, fill the hole with hot oil from a burnt seal, where you drip red colocynth and similar corrosive medicines, and place over it cotton soaked in egg white, ensuring the abscess is warm.
and if anything remains, and the pus overwhelms you, and you doubt the abscess is warm, then leave the hole and treat the abscess with soothing remedies.
then return to your work until it is healed, and do the same when flesh forms in the hole by this method.
Yet you must lighten the treatment of each weak hole according to its natural way; And by the way of an accident, in ironwork;
And do not put your hand in any of these workings until you see that this limb is tolerant of the working.
If they are red veins that cover the eye, they take away from sight its function and weaken the eye every day.
It is necessary, therefore, first to examine whether the eye in which it is located is sound and there is no other disease besides the cataract; then cauterize the eye in this manner:
instruct the patient to place their head in your hands, then suspend those veins with all the skill you possess, and let the needle be fine, double, according to this form: ›
And let there be two marks by degrees in the body according to this form:
then cauterize the veins strongly and subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after hour, until you see the veins move outside of the eye;
And be careful not to wound the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not cut deeper than those veins;
And when you have done this, instill in the eye green and red choler to corrupt what remains of the black bile.
And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, then make a poultice for the eye with soothing substances to relieve the pain, and leave it for some days until the pain is relieved and an abscess is certain, then begin again according to this manner until he is healed.
And this is the shape of the forces:
The physicians call these «arissati» fistulas:
when you cure it by cautery and by burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a trick in it that you should cut over the abscess where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see the decay and blackness, then take away all the instruments of which there is the shape;
and it is called an "asharpened head," and should be made of iron or steel, and should be pointed like a file as it appears in the following figure:
And put on the spot of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press with your hand for a short while until you know that this corruption is remedied.
And do this several times, then restore the spot with drying medications.
If the spot is healed, and flesh grows there, and the body of the wound is healed, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not infected, and no bad incident occurs, know that it is healed.
If not, then there is no other device than to bring the fistula back to the puncture of the knife according to this form: And it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered then take a drill according to this form, and let the head of the iron be three-sided, and let the shaft be tapered up to the head as you see here:
Then place it on the bone next to the tear duct, and move your hand away from the eye socket, then turn the drill until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it because the wind escapes if he holds his hand over his nose;
and then restore the place with dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the flesh heals and the spot hardens, the material goes to the nose; so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
When the eye is fully open and there is no obstruction or narrowing of the nose, then you must bind the patient;
then let him heal, then place cupping glasses on the temples without pricking to suck out [humors], then put on the eye a poultice made of iron filings and aloe and frankincense and sarcocolla, and then bandage the eye with bandages and cloths;
And the manner of bandages is such that you take bandages soft enough, and fold each one in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye may need.
Then press firmly with a hard bandage on top, and start the cupping again to draw without hurting.
Then remove the cups and leave the eye bandaged day and night, and if the bandage becomes loose, you must tighten it very much.
Then remove the bandage after a day and a night, and if you see the eye improving, that is good;
if not; then begin again with the poultice and the bandages and the bandage and the cups until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the toe When discharge comes from the bladder, it opens, and comes forth from the flesh like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see.
then if you see it covered, the work is such that you insert a needle at the root of the lower part up to the upper one, then insert another needle where there is a double thread from the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position.
then cover the place of the double thread and tie a part of the vein around it, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye a wet cloth soaked with egg.
and leave it until the thread dissolves with the vein, then treat the eye with soothing things until the wound is healed.
And sometimes the wound is bound with wool on each side of a circle of cloth until it heals.
And if the eye appears to be badly infected, pierce it with a fine needle deep into the eye, and drain the cloudy liquid from the eye, and insert it immediately;
then withdraw it until it is healed.
This disease called "alcunny" is nothing other than an inflammation that forms in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not water.
And the manner of performing this work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the inflammation rise above your eyes; Then let it be pierced, and do not descend, and let the light be dimmed, and let the patient see things as he used to;
And if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descent of the wound is not prepared as we have said.
Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a thin spatula and pierce on the hardened tissue at the junction of the sclera with the scleral ring, until the wound exudes.
And when it has exuded, then instill in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that has been boiled and mixed with honey, and then let it be treated with another treatment until it is healed.
of the eye's waters We have the likenesses of needles in the division, and those which are necessary for perforating; do it according to the healthiness.
You must make the patient sit between your crossed hands, out of the light from the sun, and bind the healthy eye very tightly.
then put the eyelid of the affected eye in your left hand if it is the left eye, or in your right hand if it is the right eye.
then take in your right hand, if it is the left eye, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand, if it is the right eye.
then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a ray in that white part of the eye towards the lesser tear duct, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly and turn your hand until it perforates the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty space.
And it is necessary that the measure of the almond-shaped eye should be at the depth of the measure from the pupil to the end of the iris. And this is the crown of the eye;
You will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument where the water is, then press it under one eye after another.
If he has weak vision now, then the patient sees what is before him and the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a while, and if the water rises in the second eye, place the finger with the instrument, and when it is inserted and does not rise, gently extract the almond by turning your hand little by little;
And then put in a little bit of pure water, and leave the eye inside. Then apply outside the eye gauze or cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of egg, and bind with healthy eye.
Now, and those who are of our time, apply a poultice with plenty of egg.
And if Almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are such men who have eyes that are too hard, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which has this form:
And then pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put in aloes, as we have said.
and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a warm pillow on which he can sleep on his back in a dark place.
and he should be still from all movements, and take light foods, and not move his head to the right or to the left, and let him rest according to his condition for three days.
then unbind him in that same dark room, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day.
and it is not necessary for you to do this at the time of the treatment or immediately after the incision, but you should wait until later because the water rises quickly.
If an abscess comes to this, that you release the eye before the seventh day, and apply a remedy that soothes the abscess;
And when it is soothed, then release the eye and place on its face one gold coin to cover it for some days, and let it always be in that darkened room.
And then go out of the house little by little, and turn back to its usual activities;
And know that no disciple should interfere in this case. And one came to us who was from Jericho, who told us that in his country they make an almagda perciet, with which they draw water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read about it in the books of the ancients; And perhaps this is something new.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, so that those who do not know them may see them;
and they should be made of brass properly. And their heads should be of the same subtlety, and the rear in three acute angles.
Sometimes there are also various types of chariots, which is why some seem to have many feet like scorpions.
And there are such that they have a wagon engraved with red color, and there is also a smooth wagon of good color. In that wagon then, which is smooth and not engraved, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
In that wagon then, which is smooth and not engraved, you must have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and open his nostrils, and cast the unguent on those wagons, and draw them out. Pour couper cela, soutiens avec un stylet subtil et aigu d'un côté, jusqu'à ce que tu saches que cette chair est entièrement coupée.
And if any part remains that cannot be cut, open it with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains. And if swelling or pus forms, then drain it as necessary;
And if it is a malignant abscess, then hasten and cauterize until the pus is dried up and all the flesh removed; then throw into the nose a mix of salt and vinegar or wine. If the nose drips, and moisture reaches the palate, know that he is healed;
And if moisture does not break through as it should, know that there is flesh born in the bone above, which prevents the instrument from coming to cut.
Then it is necessary that you insert a little thick thread of linen, and let it be tied by hand, and have between each knot a finger's width or less. And let the patient put the end of the thread in his nostril as best he can, and pull until it comes out through the mouth.
And many times children do this at school, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it.
Then hold the end that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and know each one after the other by feeling along the thread as we are in the thread.
Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe off the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before;
Do this for three days or more, until the ointment has dissolved all the remaining flesh.
and then put in the nostril a piece of lead for several days until it is healed, and if dry medicines are needed, use them.
and this is the shape of the instrument for cleansing the head, into which one distills the oils and medicines into the nostril:
And let it be of silver or copper, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and the tube likewise.
and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be full to cleanse the head.
and have one handle at the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh upon the nose
Many times at the head of the nose a disease arises which is called "telul", and it grows and becomes large often, so much that it is a visible thing to look at.
and because of this you must cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place on it the cautery or burning medicine.
and if one delays cutting it until it is large, then beware if it is hard, of dark color, and lacks sensation.
do not touch it with iron, for it is an infected abscess, for when one cuts into it sometimes, great harm comes to the patient.
And if the abscess is of a soft touch and not of fiery color, and you see that it can be entirely covered, then let the patient fast and cover the lancing without fear, and treat the place with drying and constricting things.
know that when the solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilage works, it profits little, except in some men.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, look to see if the wound is fresh in all its blood; and then bring together the two lips with one stitch, and then treat it until it heals.
and if the lips have already separated from one side to the other, then it is necessary that you cauterize all the parts of their heart until they heal, then bring together the two lips with one stitch, and hold it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and crushed incense on top. And put on the powders a piece of emplastrum made of strong glue or other adhesive plaster, and let it stay until it falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The way to stitch is that you gather the skin together: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have shown you.
of the lips' abscesses
In many people, there are hard abscesses inside the lips, similar to peas, both smaller and larger;
then you must turn back the lips, and slice into each knot, and take with tweezers and cut into every part;
Then take lupin seeds after the vitriol incision, grind them until the blood is clotted.
And then take flax seed oil, and cure the wound with dry things until it heals.
Many times there appears on the gums hardened flesh, which the ancients call "albulus".
so you must hold it with tongs, and cut it at its root, and let the wound or blood flow.
then apply vitriol powder, or other astringent and drying powders, to the wound.
And if that flesh returns after incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it. If it does not return after cautery;
Sometimes they are gathered at the roots of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs that are unsightly and rough; And sometimes the teeth turn black and yellowish green, until the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth become foul-smelling;
Then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and clean the teeth or scabs until nothing remains. And do the same for the blackness and greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are cleansed.
And if what is there at the first stage is removed, that is good; If not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all healed.
and know that the teeth require various types of instruments for healing, according to what the work shows, because the scrapers with which one cleans outside the teeth have other forms than those with which one cleans between the teeth; and let these forms and others be ready with you.
It is necessary that when you treat the tooth of its pain, you delay the extraction as long as you can, because one should not do this. for it is a very high substance until such time that one has no excuse to extract it.
Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw out the tooth, you must be certain of the aching tooth. Often the pain deceives the patient and he thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and has the good tooth extracted; et yet the pain does not leave until the evil spirit is expelled, for we have already tried this with these sick people.
and when you are certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you burn around the tooth in every direction with strong cautery to protect the gum from all sides;
then move it with your fingers or fine tweezers at the first knot and notch, until it is well loosened, then firmly secure the tweezers. and let the patient's head be between your knees, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés remove the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and push it gently into each side, and remove it as you did first.
And if the tooth is decayed and hollowed out, you must fill it with cloth where the holes are. And if you delicately hold it like tweezers, so that it does not break when pulling.
And it is necessary to work very wisely around the gum to extract the tooth.
And take good care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and the patient will suffer greater pain than before due to the root’s malice.
And be careful not to act as do the ignorant surgeons, who through their haste and boldness sometimes break the tooth and do not achieve what we have described.
but they sometimes cause great illness due to the roots left behind or the broken tooth, as we have often seen.
and when the tooth is removed, wash the area with wine or vinegar and salt.
and if blood continues to come out, which often happens, fill the area with powdered vitriol.
And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
The shapes of the instruments that one uses to first pull teeth should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull out the tooth;
and these are the shapes: And let them be of thick metal so that they do not bend when pulling out, and let them be well-made iron, and let them have teeth to hold firmly.
from the roots of the teeth When the root remains after pulling, you must put moistened cotton in butter on the place for one or two days until the spot is softened, then insert tweezers called "algefri," which make it look like a bird's beak;
and inside they are made like a file, and this is the shape:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pincers, then you must uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place there the instrument called "althali," which is actually pincers.
And let it be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with this, that is good;
If not, then use all the instruments, which are described below:
And one helps oneself with this instrument which has two teeth, of which here is the form: and other irons that are in front for the reason of teeth, and with this instrument which looks like large pincers, of which here is the form:
And let this instrument be such that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and similarly, other instruments which are not counted here.
and the wise and subtle master finds his own instrument by himself, according to what his works and the illness show him, for there are such illnesses where the ancients did not teach any instruments due to their diversity. And if one breaks the cartilage or other bones, he should look for the necessary instruments that I have mentioned, and use the following gestures:  as shown in the figure below.
And let it be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, that it does not slip away, but can hold and remove it.
And then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, then remove everything from this instrument.
When the teeth appear not according to nature, and their form is ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know if the tooth is new after a lost tooth, and is not in its proper place, and it cannot be filed or ground down.
Then draw it out; And if it is attached to the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and is made of iron, sharp at the end.
And the claw bites little by little each day due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others; and if it is protruding such that it can be filed, then file it with a file like this form.
And it is like the limb from which needles are made;
And in the limb where the tooth pokes little by little each day, gently so that it does not move until it falls out;
then the plain at the end of all razors, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, it is necessary to file down the roughness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the front teeth loosen, either by impact or by falling out, and the patient cannot chew what he eats without them falling out, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, and this does not work;
then they must be restrained with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but the gold never moves;
And let the wire be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
And if you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and double it between two healthy teeth, then put the pliers between the misaligned teeth, whether there is one or more, until you wisely reach the other healthy tooth. Then begin the covering again from the part where you started, and gently and wisely tighten your hand until it does not move.
And let your wire be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Then cut the wire from the pliers with shears and reassemble it, and put it between the healthy tooth so that it does not harm the tongue.
And then leave it tied tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone or the thread breaks, tie it again with another thread.
if it stays and serves thus all its time, this is the form of the teeth and the arrangement of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, fresh by fresh, as we have said.
and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes a tooth is made from the bone of an ox, and it is placed where the gap is, and it is tied as we have said, and stays and serves thus for a long time.
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue at birth. or by accident of a closed wound;
and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your lap, and lift up the tongue;
then cut the nervous ligament from the wide part, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or a knot, and this is due to the sudden closure of the wound, then insert the hook and cut the ligament widely.
and be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery beneath; xspace
and when you have done this, raise the place with rose water and aloe, or cold water, then place a linen compress beneath the tongue;
And the scabies should be treated by the patient every night, so that the place may not heal.
And if bleeding continues, then apply ground vitriol to the place; and if the blood is thin, then cauterize with a slow-burning cautery, which is good for this. then continue to care for it until it is healed.
and if you see a dark or hard color, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
and if it is inclined to turn black, and there is moisture, then apply onion juice, and make an incision with a subtle spatula, and release it from both sides; And if your blood fails you in your work, apply a poultice of vitriol until it is stained, then return to your work until you draw out all the strength.
Then lift up the place of ease and rest, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of the throat abscesses Sometimes there come into the throat certain ulcers called "godath," and they are properly called the two almonds. And when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
If it is a hard abscess of small feeling and greenish color, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to prevent bleeding; but let it be until it is ripe, and then you will separate it, lest it should burst of its own accord;
and if it is of pale color again, and the root is delicate, then prepare the instrument to cut, but first look whether the hot abscess rests and is quieted.
Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head be in your hand, and he open his mouth and you take the root between his hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, which has this shape;
and let it be of silver or fine brass as thin as a knife:
And when you have pressed the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take a hook and insert it into the almond, and draw strongly upward more than you can;
And pierce something through the cloth with it, then cut with the instrument, whose form resembles a forceps. And nevertheless, the heads are curved and one against the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of Indian iron or steel.
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, then use the tongs, which has this form: And let them be cutting on one side and notched on the other.
And when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner. After the incision, gargle the patient with hot water and cold water and vinegar. If there is bleeding, then gargle the patient with water or boiled pomegranate rinds, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed. then cure until he is healthy;
and sometimes other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two tonsils, so cut them off in the same way as the two tonsils equally.
And I treated a woman of an abscess that was located within her throat, namely one small abscess;
and it had almost completely closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed like this for one day or two.
And the abscess was so swollen that it had pushed out two eyes through the two nostrils of the nose.
I hurried then quickly, and inserted in it one oncine [a small lancet], then drew out forcefully, and drew out a great portion of pus;
Then make another incision in the other nostril, and open the mouth and press the tongue.
Afterwards, I inserted the probe into these abscesses and drained some of it, and only a little blood came out. And thus the woman's throat passage was opened up, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting away at that abscess for a long time.
And the abscess would always grow back and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large.
Then I cauterized it from within the throat: and thus it remained without growing;
And I am separated from these parts, and let God make of them after me.
of the eye
When water descends into the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular";
And if it is below and thick and round, it is called "eye".
When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that this abscess is calmed down, and it is subtle, then you must cut it.
And that which is round and gathered together and is not long; And it is bloody or of a blackish color or black, then you must avoid cutting into it. Because there is great danger to the patient.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have said, of its whiteness and length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned before; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from below, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
And you must not cut more than the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
for if you cut more, then it will harm the voice and speech;
and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the patient is afraid of being cut, then it is necessary that you use anesthetic for the cauterization to reduce their fear.
And the manner of the cautery should be very sharp. And it is that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and cauterize with hot, fresh water, neither too thick nor too thin. And in the use of this instrument, which has the following form:
And at its end is a lock where one places the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye.
And let the patient lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so it does not descend to the throat or wound.
Then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour until you see it moistened and the irritation from the medicine is soothed.
And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the corner of the eye, so that the cotton dries on the eye.
And do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and it will fall off after four or five days.
And if you need to repeat the cautery of the medicine, then repeat it, and after the cautery wipe around the ulcer with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
And let it be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is more effective for incisions than the cautery;
if it is cured with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and horehound and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in one pot, and put asafetida in it, and boil;
And let the jar be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the jar there should be an instrument made according to this manner: And let it be made of silver or brass, and one of the heads should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapors rise through the neck, until the vein is suppressed.
afterwards it is often repeated until the vein dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, because many things can happen. And do not perform this unless at the decline of a hot abscess.
And if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and insert into it the yolk of an egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot. for the head of an egg or milk does not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good cure together with salt.
Many times something sticks in the throat like a bone or fishbone;
so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move;
and that which does not open to you and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach; perhaps it will expel the harsh thing through vomiting;
or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; And tie a thread to the sponge, then make it pass through. and when she comes to the place, she will harden, and then you will draw the hair;
and if it does not come out as we have said, take an instrument of lead in this shape:
And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it may enter the throat more easily, and have its tip raised up; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, so that the entire throat does not swell, nor push a bone into it;
and it is better that the patient inserts the instrument himself, because he can feel where the thing is difficult; If the bottle is empty, or if he draws strongly with all of the instrument equally, until it is strong.
from the blood of the throat
Anytime bloodletting is performed, as I have said in the section on divisions, by means of medical treatment; And when this does not benefit at all, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, after you have pressed the tongue to the instrument that I have told you about.
Et si tu vois la sangsue, alors traie-la avec une très petite aiguille, ou des pinces fines qui conviennent à cela.
And if this does not work, take a horsehair and place it in the patient's throat, then put a hot iron at the end of the hair, and do this frequently. And if the patient has a fever all day long.
Then take a full glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without choking, and move it around in his hand often; And as soon as the blood feels the water, it will fall out.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument that I have mentioned in the section on fumigating the eye;
Do this many times, for she will fall without hesitation.
And the manner of the fumigation is such that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and let the lid be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and through that hole place the head of the instrument.
then cast your fumigation, and the patient should place the end of the reed in his mouth, and close his mouth so that no smoke escapes, but let it go down to the lungs.
and then the phlegm will fall now, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times;
and let the patient be thirsty, and chew on salty things and such, and do not drink water.
And then he will need to come out by this rule.
And the shape of the instrument with which one draws blood is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved pincers for entering into the throat; and let it have the appearance of a sparrow's beak, and let it have the roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot leave behind;
Many appearances of abscesses are, according to the memories that come hereafter in this book, one and another, and they differ in perforation and cutting;
and it is in two ways, one of which is in its appearance itself, and that which holds moisture.
And the second manner is according to the places where they are on the body.
because the abscess of the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess of the fleshy place is different from that which comes in the joints, and each should be judged accordingly in the work.
And so with abscesses that one must not pierce, until the boil is dead according to its course;
And so with those that one must pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their course, such as abscesses near joints.
Because when an abscess comes near the joints and it is left until it is purulent around, it may happen that the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which causes contraction in that limb.
Or if the abscess is near the principal member, and you delay the piercing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member.
Or if it is near the fundament, one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe;
And one must not pierce a ripe abscess without completed digestion, except for those near the fundament, lest it putrefy within, and become inflamed inside, and a fistula develop. And it cannot heal within a short period of time.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of the maturation of the abscess according to its completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the diminution of the pain and redness, and the softening and the improvement of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
And it is necessary that you make the incision sit in the most dependent part of the abscess, and where it opens moves;
And let the incision be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in the joints and near the nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no folding. En those that bend, according to this limb.
And when an abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better that you leave the opening until it is confirmed by completed digestion, as we have said.
Because if you pierce it before this, the body will be elongated by the venom from it, and it is full of much filth. And perhaps it will harden the lips and deepen them with it.
And if any abscess is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs from it.
And it is necessary that you bring forth in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many slits according to the size of the abscess.
And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to remove the core and cover it; When they become old like cloths, and are dead, then one must do as one does with boils:
And if there are such that are split into three corners, and some that one cuts like the leaves of myrtle, as boils of the corners.
And if there are such [conditions] when one makes a circular incision, and other incisions and similar cuts.
Those who have no head, as with a soft superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it fully;
And when the abscess is large and has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once in that hour, but draw out part of it; Then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out some more again; do this many times from large to small, until all the pus comes out.
Similarly if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old feeble men. For the spirit may sometimes jump out with the issue of the pus, which could accidentally kill the patient, and you would not notice.
Avoid this chapter with great caution. When you have perceived your abscess, then clean the wound, and look to see if the abscess is small. And if it is a deep cut, then apply linen or old cotton bandages. And if it is a large abscess and there are many openings, then you must insert a bandage into each one so that they meet each other.
And if you have cut into the abscess a piece of leather and you have wrapped it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or scraps of linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day.
Then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs during your work, then bring cold and easy water, and moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et si le saignement persiste, administre un traitement et des soins appropriés, ainsi que les poudres dont j'ai parlé dans ce livre. Si cela se produit pendant l'hiver, et que la zone de l'abcès est très nerveuse, il faut appliquer des tentes et des draps humides avec du vin et de l'huile chaude.
et si cela se produit en été, et que la zone est charnue, il faut appliquer des draps humides avec de l'eau et de l'huile, ou du vin et de l'huile froide, pendant trois jours, comme nous l'avons dit.
et ensuite, incise l'abcès, essuie-le et soigne-le comme il convient, jusqu'à ce qu'il guérisse.
And this is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
and as I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, see here the chapter.
When the veins of the head cause small abscesses, and they are like those that are in tissues, similar to the pouch of a chicken, there are many similar ones.
There are those that are fat and such where there is moisture like poultices;
and there are those that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the surgeon does not make a mistake.
And the work of cutting is such that you should try any instrument that is called an "entromissoire," which causes the shape to come hereafter, whatever it contains.
Car if it contains moisture, then open it from above the long [bone].
And when the moisture is emptied, scrape off without leaving anything the skin that contains this moisture, because it returns immediately if one leaves something there;
then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; if not, in water and salt, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; And this will happen to those who remain in the night.
And then resume cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know well that it does not remain in the night;
then treat the wound with ointment according to what is suitable, until he is healed.
And if the abscess holds the night oil, cut it according to this form, lengthwise; and put your claws in it, and skin it all around, and put all your effort into drawing the coat where it lies;
And if the art [or craft] makes you uncomfortable, do as I have told you afterward.
And do the same for a pustular abscess, in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
And cut above the pustular and moist abscess, for it is lighter because they are of little blood. And if there is one of these abscesses in the head where there is no moisture, and it is like the abscess that I cut on the head of an old woman;
And I found the abscess like a deaf stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken. And if one had struck it, one would have made as much of a wound as from a stone.
In other abscesses that come to the head, except for those that come to the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the most dependent place, so that the pus may exit;
And treat them as is necessary.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and there are many of them, interconnected with each other.
And each scrofula is properly inside its rib, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said; And the likenesses of these scrofulae are many.
And the likenesses of these scrofulae are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are also malignant ones that do not want to obey healthiness.
And then in that which you see of good disposition to touch, and it is similar to the color of the body, and moves from each part and is not harsh to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery or duct, and is not deep;
then you must cut above it, and scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart with tweezers if needed, as we have said in the case of head abscesses.
and draw it out little by little, and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and let the instrument not be sharp or cutting, lest the hand slip, and do not go too far forward, so that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and this prevents you from working, then place in the wound vitriol paste, or some powder that stanches blood, and tighten the wound. And leave it there until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to fester.
And when the blood is stanchioned, return to your work until you complete it.
Then inquire at your fingertip if there remain any small scrofula, and cut them off and cleanse them.
And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then it is not proper for you to cut this scrofula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm.
Then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then dress it.
And if you cut the entire scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them now, since no excess remains due to the size of the scrofula. so it is necessary that you take care to cut the root of it, and pull strongly, and stitch as we have said.
so it is necessary that you take care to cut the root of it, and pull strongly, and stitch as we have said. Those scrofula that hold excess, pierce there where it appears dark;
and pierce it in the same way as was said before, hanging downwards, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; And when the wound is well cleaned, dress it with healing ointment until it heals.
The ancients spoke and discussed the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who has done it, and this is a record of their words.
For those with stridor, the split in the throat called "epiglottis" must be cauterized; And that no aid is given through this, because all the veins and the flesh of the patient are hot with abscess in the mouth or throat or both tonsils.
When the illness is in the tonsil channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid death from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it between three or four small transverse slits, between two circles, or by the amount of the cartilage slice;
and the patient is suitable for cutting the epiglottis if there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
And if the master is fearful, he must extend the skin of the throat to the very end, then cut the heart until it reaches the chin. And pour out the vessels of blood, if you see anything, then cut off the sinew, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm from the brain which escapes strongly through the place that is broken, and by the loss of voice.
And leave the wound open for a while.
And when the time has passed in which strangulation is feared, join the two lips of the heart wound, and sew it all alone without any padding.
Then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh until it is healed.
Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is healed. Then cut off the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is preserved from death.
And therefore the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease had passed, and it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to close the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a maiden took a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the cartilage of the larynx.
And I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
I revealed the wound, and found the blood that had come out of it, although it did not pierce a vein or a large artery except for the throat, and the wind was coming out strongly through the wound.
I hastened and sewed the wound, and healed it until it was healed;
And nothing happened to the maiden except that she lost her voice, which later returned to its original state;
for this reason, I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis, there shall not be fear.
this abscess is called "goiter," and it is a large abscess the color of a sloe, and it is very common in women;
and it occurs in two ways: naturally, and accidentally;
or naturally, there is no humor present.
And the accidental [type] is in two ways, of which one is similar to our fat, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear [of operating], and it should not be done by fire, except in the small one, and test and search throughout the entire [affected] area; If you find it thus as we know from fat, and it cannot be bled by any vein, then cut it, like one cuts the nose, and draw all its hair, if there is any. And bind well immediately, and treat it as needed until it is perfectly healed.
There are many types of noses, from which I will describe all the similarities;
and now it is necessary that I speak about all the differences that exist between a nose and an ulcer.
I say that an ulcer is hot and feverish as long as the inflammation lasts, and the pus has matured; then the fever and heat subside.
With the nose there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the syfac, which is its own sack and corresponds to the body's color, and begins like a little bag, and grows. ‌
And they are according to two likenesses, either fat or moist, and of many colors as I have said in the division.
Il convient, quand tu viens à la cure du nœud, que tu éprouves et enquêtes d'abord de tout l'instrument qui est appelé «entromissoire», selon ce que sa forme sera dans le chapitre suivant.
And the manner of the examination of abscesses for us is that you take the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you know that the instrument has perceived the heart, then according to the size of the abscess;
then draw out the probe, and be careful in this, lest it should jump out.
If running moisture occurs, whatever color it has, then pierce it as I have said about other abscesses;
and if after the probe comes moisture, know that it is fat, then pierce it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape from each side and beware of the coat where it lies, so that you draw it out whole with the knot;
And if you cannot remove it whole, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, the injury returns many times;
And if even a little remains and the wound troubles you, then fill the wound with some corrosive and hot herbs, hold the wound tight, apply soothing things to the abscess, keep it warm, and care for it with other remedies until it is healed;
And if the wound is large, sew together the two lips of the wound, and care for it as one would for a flesh wound.
And if the beating of the veins is against you or something else, then hurry and fill the place with crushed vitriol, and leave it there for two days or three, until the wound putrefies and the boiling of the blood ceases. Then return to the copper what remains of the nut.
Behold here are the forms of the intromissory instruments, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small.
And there are three quarters which are called "albarets," and one that is called "breb," and they come in three kinds. large, medium, and small, to enclose the abscesses of fistulae.
And they are like the needles used to sew sorcerers, and they are made of citrine bronze, or iron, or silver. Those that are yellow in color are worth more, and those blackened with lead are better suited for enclosing the scabs of fistulae;
And there are three types: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the openings.
The shapes of the nails are very diverse, as you can see here:
And there are nails that have two curves of three types as well;
And there are also nails with three curves, which are of three types.
And there are also nails with two curves, and single-curved nails, all of which come in three types.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The heads of these tools are sharp, and some do not cut more than from one side, with which we scrape the nails so that we do not cut the vein or the nerve;
And of these intrusions are the amputated hands, so that the patient does not notice them at the opening of abscesses;
and they are of three kinds: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and one should not use them except in fleshy places, such as the legs, arms, breasts, and the groin, and similar places;
and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling the scrapings of pus, in this form, with which one stops bleeding: And it is placed sometimes in the location that heals quickly at the veins and the arteries, and sometimes according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much so that they resemble women's breasts;
And they remain unsightly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, must follow this form of these lines from b to g: Then scrape the fat, and fill the wound with meat-enhancing medicine; then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
And if the nipple sags downward and is made thin by its size, as happens to women, then make two cuts above it, through two similar openings. so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, making the larger line contain the smaller one according to this form, from this line b to this line g; Then peel off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely done, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, you must fill the wound with dampened cotton and caustic ointment. And leave it until it dissolves the rest and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
These abscesses that come under the armpits are hard like scrofula with ribs, and there are some that contain moisture.
Therefore, those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat it with ointment appropriate for this purpose until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like scrofula, then cut it as we have said for cutting scrofula, and if the wound discharges pus, apply cautery as we have said before.
When the articular surface is damaged and the skin above it is healed, it often results in abscesses, and similarly, an inflamed vein can cause abscesses.
And if one recognizes it thus when it is due to the artery, then the abscess is long in depth. and when you feel it with your fingers, you sense a tightening;
and when it is due to the vein, then the reason is clearly apparent.
and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and in the groin and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the iron cure, and that which is on the head should also be avoided, and in that which is from a swelling of the artery, make an incision above the skin along its length.
then cut the flesh as usual, and separate the artery beautifully from the tissues until it is exposed;
Then insert below it a needle, and make it pierce to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
then prick the place that is between the two ligatures with a lancet until the pus comes out, and let the abscess be relieved;
then prepare the dressing as I have shown you, until the ligature falls off. Then treat it with an ointment afterwards, until it is healed.
And if the abscess is as large as the vein, then it is necessary that you hold in your hand whatever you can of the abscess all the way to the skin, then insert the needle below the place that you are holding in your hand, and make it pierce, and there should be a double thread, so that you pull it out from the other side. 》 Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, with a thread on one of the two parts to the two shoulders.
And if you doubt that the thread might come loose, then sew another needle through all of the first thread below the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess until the pus comes out, then cut the pus from the core and leave what is tied.
Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply dressings of lint and onion until he is healed.
Just like abscesses come in the artery and vein, so too they come in the nerves when they are pierced, or by excessive labor, and similar things.
And this happens most often in the shoulders and the thighs, and in all places where there are joints, and these are serious abscesses, and their color resembles that of flesh, and it is in many positions without pain.
And when one pulls it strongly, the patient feels pain, which is not entirely in the body, but below the heart.
And it moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and those in the joints should not be struck with iron. Perhaps there will be contracture. And those that are on the head or on the forehead, break the skin with a spatula.
And those that are on the head or on the forehead, break the skin with a spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with pincers and cut into its root.
And if it is large, suspend it on the nail of the little finger and skin it, then remove it and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, with subtle roots and a large head.
And there are some that are small and others that are very large;
And I have seen in a man who had two in his belly that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were always wet with moisture.
I cut them and found that one weighed eighteen ounces and the other six, and the work in the incision is such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the tumor is white and moist and has fine roots; If the wound is wide at the shoulder blade, and there is a fire cautery in your presence.
If the wound is wide at the shoulder blade, and there is a fire cautery in your presence. For in cutting, blood often flows too abundantly, and if the bleeding overcomes you, then hasten to cauterize.
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of linen, and tie it around the wound as we have said, and leave it for two days.
And then tighten it, and do not stop pulling the linen thread until it cuts through the wound, and thus it heals without pain.
And if the roots are large, there is fear to cut directly into the abdomen, but you can safely cut halfway, then cauterize so it does not return.
then heal the wound, and be careful not to cut the skin that is of fiery color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
Because this is an embedded carbuncle, and I will come to the treatment of carbuncles afterwards.
when the abscess has become hot If the swelling of the wound comes from the cautery of a wound or cleft in the intestine, and it is on the belly and goes to some of the bladders, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as mentioned above, or from windiness;
and if it is from the rupture of the intestine and the exiting of the bladder, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens in various ways. And if it is due to the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed with two fingers, it returns to its place, and then comes back, and perhaps it will become hard, and swells greatly at the entrance of the bath and due to strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, but does not constrict;
And if it is due to blood, the abscess will be large and hard, and will have a fixed size. And if it is due to gas, it will be soft to the touch, and the operation is such that you should look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or gas.
And if it is due to gas, it will be soft to the touch, and the operation is such that you should look to see whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or gas. Therefore, you must leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, then you should instruct the patient to lift his leg and be stretched out straight, then press all around the stomach. Then have him lie down gently between your hands, then go around the place you have marked with all the spatula, then extend half of the abscess upwards with the whole large incision. Then tie around it with a strong thread or a strong silk cord firmly, and let the knot be secure.
Then work on half of the abscess spread out over the cord, and insert your index finger, and search for the intestines. If you find it caught in the cord, then free it, and push the intestine out of the stomach;
And if you find the swelling, then take it with tweezers, and cut off the excess.
And if the artery opposes you or the vein, then go around it carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two fine threads, and insert the two needles around what you have done in a cross that you made pierce.
Then hold the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place until it turns black, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself; And cut it when it is softened and blackened, then treat the wound as needed, and remove the abscess as we have said.
And cut it when it is softened and blackened, then treat the wound as needed, and remove the abscess as we have said. And drain the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and heal the wound.
of the cancer We have said in the section on the similarities of cancer, and how one should work with medicines, and how to avoid the use of iron.
And we say that cancer begins in the flesh, and great care is needed in the treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where it can be scraped off, such as cancer in the breasts, and in the thighs, and similar places, and one should remove all of it when it is at the beginning;
nor has anyone ever healed one before me.
And the work, when it is in such a place that it can be removed, as we have said, is that you first purge the patient of black bile;
then let him fast if he has an obvious fullness, then place the patient in a good position to perform the work;
then throw away your clippers and cautery iron, and remove all hair from all around it, leaving nothing behind;
and let the blood flow freely, and press well on the area with your hand or some other thing, and if the flowing of blood hinders you from making the incision in the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stopped; Then heal him with another treatment until he is healed.
Of dropsy We have already said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron:
and one should not use iron in these two similarities: that is to say, tympanitis and hippuritic swelling, because they are deadly things;
therefore when you treat this similarity of hydropsy which is called "eclipse" with medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, then look to see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides hydropsy, such as a burst belly and similar things; If you do not touch it with iron, for there is doubt;
And if you see the patient of great strength, and he has no other illness except dropsy alone, and is not too young nor too old, then you should act as follows: Lay the patient flat on his back in your hands, and have an assistant press on the abdomen just below the ribs, then take the spiny spatula according to this form: And let it be cut in two parts. with a point, but nevertheless it should not be so long that when inserted it could reach the intestines and cause injury;
Then check if the dropsy has spread towards the intestines: If so, you must cut open three fingers wide straight down to the groin; And if the dropsy is due to liver disease, let your incision be on the left side of the navel three fingers' width.
And if it is due to the spleen, let it be on the right side. And it is not necessary that the patient lie on the incision so that the excesses do not flow to that weak place;
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and discharge it, and lift your hand to the entire subcutaneous tissue between the skin and the fascia just as in scraping to the thickness of a nail or thereabouts.
Then pierce the fascia until the subcutaneous tissue reaches the desired place, which is the watery area. Then draw it strongly, and into this place insert this instrument, the form of which is as follows: And it is similar to a fine silver chain, and it is made of light brass or copper, and has in its lower part a small hole. and on one side there are three holes. and two on the other side, and one on another.
and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision which the scribes cut into the quill.
at the top there is a small handle, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it will immediately rise above the water.
empty then half or a third of it, because if you empty more than is necessary at that time, perhaps the patient will die from the loss of spirit from the weapon, or he will fall unconscious, or he will approach death.
But according to its emptiness, according to its power, according to what the patient's constitution indicates, and his pulse;
Then withdraw the instrument and hold the water, which is now held by the kerf that stops up the hole on the syphac, as I have mentioned, that you should pierce in this manner;
then resume the instrument the next day, if you see the patient tolerating this, and draw out a small quantity of water;
do this every day, and be careful not to empty it all but leave only a little bit of water.
And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water in them, then treat with burial or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing in the sun, and let them drink wine. And the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extracting water, as I have said before.
Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Then it should be pierced as soon as possible with a very fine needle in this manner:
Then put in the opening a thin cloth of linen, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four. And when he wants to make water, let the cloth be removed, and make water, and then replace it.
And perhaps it is not necessary, because the water that comes forth does not leave it closed.
He whose opening is small, let him be treated with a lead weight as we have said, so that it will widen.
Those who do not have the opening in its place are afflicted, because some are born with the opening at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they lift their penis upwards; And cannot heal because the matter cannot reach the bone, and this is a serious illness.
And the manner of working is that the patient lies on his back, then stretch the head of the member and the foreskin like the width of a quill, so that the hole is in the middle, as it should be;
And beware of bleeding that often occurs there, and if it happens, staunch it as one staunches blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the boils of the penis Often these baths come to the member, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh;
And there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
if it is necessary that you take them at one time subtly, and cut and clean all of them, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment on top then continue the treatment with fine-tuning ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, with foul color and odor, then you must bring a cautery to it.
When you have cut it, and if the plant is partially inside the vein and partially outside, then you must first remove the part that is inside. And when it is joined together, then treat the outer part.
Because when you treat them together, the head of the vein is not assured to not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come into the vein and in the flesh.
then you must cut away all that is black and corrupt, then apply a plaster made of honey, flour, pomegranate rind, and beans, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery as follows:
The cautery helps with two conditions together: that is to say, for the flow of blood and for corruption.
And if the head of the bladder is corrupt and retracted, then you must insert a cane made of pine into the bladder's channel, and let the patient urinate through it.
And when the hair is adherent to the head of the bladder, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, due to a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape it off with one sharp instrument until the tissue is loosened and the head of the bladder is freed on all sides;
And if it is difficult to scrape this away, then you must burn it off with a hot spatula at the head of the bladder and the skin.
Then cut well between two (joints), and place one subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water, that it does not dry again.
Circumcision is not a separation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will, especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best and lightest work for healing.
I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have seen most of the masters and surgeons who perform circumcisions do it around the penis, on the foreskin, and on the entire glans.
if the skin is cut because there are two layers, and perhaps one cuts the upper layer and leaves the lower one. And there it swells up, and the pain is doubled, and at the end of the day, the point of the limb is not secure.
and at the incision of the nail perhaps the iron will slip away, and the work will be ruined, and many times it happens that they do not need an incision, and I want it to be so.
Of the amputation that is done at the joints, I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the scissors cut equally well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, cut equally in all your strength. but let the thread be well tightened around the skin;
and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child, if he understands, think that you are not doing anything to him but tying a thread around the wand, and then let him rejoice in all the ways you can;
then make it stand upright between your hands, and respond to the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
then put your hand on the stick and blow into the heart, and pull it up until the head of the stick is inside; then clean it well from the gathered dirt, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the pocket to another ligature;
then clean it well from the gathered dirt, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it under the pocket to another ligature; and hold it with the two fingers of the second ligature at the thumb and index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart quickly and pull out the head of the stick; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the cure. And put powder on it and on the powder a cloth stuck with a little of egg white cooked tempered with rose water, infused with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it again until it is healed.
The form of the plaster for cleansing is as follows:
both ends must be sharp and equal in size.
the mistake of cleansing is when the heart within is at the incision;
therefore you must spread it with your finger before the place forms an abscess;
and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
And if they exceed three days, and that which is below the penis is swollen, leave it until the abscess is appeased, and lightly skin it.
If you can move the head as you please, and be careful of the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all.
Then cure the place with a sudorific wound powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if the head goes beyond measure and moves upward, it will not harm;
Cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
of the retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to a stone, or frozen blood, or bone, or dead flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to the stone which is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees. And let his feet be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the upper part of the back, and the patient should hold himself upright as much as he can. And then the neck of the bladder is constrained to push out the stone from above, so that the urine is released.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe," of which this is the form:
And let it be of fine silver, lightly hammered, like the feather of a bird. And let the chain be one and a half handspans long, and let it be thin at the top.
And the manner of urine evacuation is such that you take a double thread, tie a wool or cotton bag at one end, and put the thread end into the syringe;
and trim the excess wool and insert it into the syringe until the end, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and make the patient sit on a chair, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis back towards the scrotum.
Then push the syringe forward to the bladder, and the patient will feel it until it reaches an empty space, and this is not done correctly unless because the passage through which it passes is twisted.
Then stretch the thread all along the wool strand by strand, and the urine will follow the wool, then extract it firmly, and make the urine flow.
And repeat with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relieved.
When there are scabs or blood in the bladder, or an accumulation of pus, and you introduce water and medicine, do this with all the instrument called "clepsedra," and it is shaped like this:
It is closed, and has three holes: Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.
And let the leather chosen for the surgeon's purse be such that it stops the tube well without additional material, so that one can draw out the moisture and insert when needed.
And when you place your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the funnel into the moisture and draw what is inside.
Thus you will draw out the moisture with the funnel, then strongly reinsert the drawn tube. Then the moisture will enter inside and go to the bladder immediately, so that the patient will feel it.
And this is the form of a subtle enema by which one enemas the bladder.
It is made of silver or copper and its head is higher.
And under the breast where the chain falls.
Then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it that you wish to enema the bladder with, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and warm this moisture on the fire;
Then insert the head of the enema into the penis, then press your hand on the bladder until all the moisture has entered, so that the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around. Then insert a strong thread through these holes, then close the circle like one closes a basket, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
And do as you did with the bladder, press to your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have already said in the division the types of stone and their extraction along with medications;
And I have spoken about the difference between the rain-inflicted stone and all its signs, and in which stone one should work by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis.
and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is inflicted in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that the water from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety;
and it excretes sand, and it causes the patient to urinate blood, and he frequently urinates, and then becomes paralyzed. And to many of these jumps the foundation.
And healing is swift in children until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and it is of moderate difficulty for those who are between youth and old age.
And the treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines. For it sometimes interferes with seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet and bend him back and forth so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and sometimes comes out from above.
Then let him sit between your prepared hands, with his hands under his thighs so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards.
Then seek and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone within, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
And if it does not fall upon touching the whole of it, then moisten your finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult. and place it in his rectum, and seek for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it up to the neck of the bladder.
then press with your finger upon it, and draw it out at the place where you wish to cut.
And command the attendant to press upon the bladder with his hand, and order him to raise his right testicle with his hand, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the testicles in the place where the cut is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme: Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; ›
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: It is necessary to go out;
And if it is under, similar to a bulge and round, its exit is light.
For that one, therefore, where there are angles and edges, make the cut larger;
And if it does not jump out, then you must pull with tweezers that are like a file at the top, to strongly pull the stone so that it does not escape; Or you put under it a subtle curved instrument at the tip;
And if you cannot trick it this way, then widen the pouch where the hole is, and if the vein tears, then pinch it with a caustic.
And if there is more than one stone, first insert the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut on it, then draw it out strongly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are many.
And if it is very large, it must be sewn, and a larger wound must be made. Because two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine always comes from there where the wound cannot heal;
but nevertheless you must strive to draw it out, or to break it with pincers, until you remove it piece by piece;
and when you have completed your work, then fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it, and put on top a moistened cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then lay the patient on his back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you dislocate it, wash very well the place with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of diafincaon and ointment of basilicaon until it is healed.
And if such abscesses and corrosions come to the wound, and blood clots in the bladder, causing the urine to be retained in such a manner that it does not pass with the urine: Pour in the wound, then draw out that blood, because if it remains, it will run to the bladder and cause putrefaction.
then lift the wound with water and vinegar and oil, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed.
and it is necessary that every time you treat him, you bind the two thighs together, and place the medicines on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is in the duct of the penis, and stuck inside, so that the urine cannot come out. then the treatment that I have mentioned before, which you cut many times, is excused from cutting in this case. I have already proven it thus.
Take a rod of iron according to this shape, and let there be three sharp points on one end:
Then take a thread and tie it around the rod under the stone, so that it cannot go back into the bladder;
then put the punch in the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the punch in your hand in the stone little by little, so that you can pierce the stone from the other side;
then the urine will come out, and press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the rod. Then it is immediately broken, and it jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
and if you cannot do this due to any obstacle, then tie a thread under the stone and another one on top, then bend the rod at the stone between the two ties, then pull hard, and untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood that is in the wound; and the treatment until he is cured.
of the woman's stone
It sometimes happens that a stone becomes lodged in women, and if it does happen, the treatment is difficult. It is forbidden for three reasons:
one reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
and the second reason is that one cannot find a skilled woman who will expose herself to the doctors, especially when she is virtuous.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a skilled woman in this hand-based art;
and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman is more deeply embedded than in a man, which requires a deeper cut, and it is very frightening. And if necessity demands it, you should seek a skilled midwife, and they are rarely found, and if you cannot find one, then look for a skillful and subtle chaste doctor;
And it presents a wise midwife with experience in women's lives, or a woman who knows some of the art, and instructs her to do what you command regarding the investigation of the stone; and looks very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
and looks very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then she must insert her finger into the anus and seek the stone;
and if she finds it, she constrains it under her finger, and recommends that she insert her finger into the vagina of the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand strongly on the bladder.
If she finds it, she must move it bit by bit from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh;
then cut into the stone on the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the knee, in the place where it is convenient to operate, and feel the stone in that area. and do not move your finger on top of or below the stone, and make the first cut small;
and do not move your finger on top of or below the stone, and make the first cut small; then press the reed into the cut, if you feel the stone narrow the wound until the stone can come out forcefully; and know that there are many types of stones.
that is to say, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and with furrows;
If you know the similarities in order to understand the outcome.
And if the blood flows profusely, then apply ground vitriol to the place, and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops.
then return to your work until the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I have told you about for extracting stones in men to help you in your work;
and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the spot and compress with bandages and cloths, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, for fear the patient may die. then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place becomes cool, return to your work until the stone is weakened.
Ramic acid is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white syrup that is beneath the heart of the testicles, which contains the semen.
and it is called "syrup," and sometimes it is properly in the fabric of the semen, so that one might think it is another egg.  /> and when this occurs, it should not be done, but rather left alone to avoid harming the patient. And this is the leather of the egg between the white as we have said.
And this does not happen if it is not a pox. And the formation of this collection comes from weakness in the kidneys, and that matter is spread out.
And sometimes it comes from bruising on the eggs, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a yellowish color, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens most often.
and these are the signs to recognize this collection, because if it is in the white as we have said, the abscess is reasonable, the pox long like the shape of an egg, and the egg does not open, for it has moisture all around.
And if there is moisture in the very fabric, then the abscess is reasonable with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the eyelids and the white surface, one feels it well.
Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test all the surrounding area, from which its form comes before. According to what follows the probe, judge what is inside.
And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
then place him on his back, on something a little high, and put many blankets under him.
Then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on his right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs beneath the corner of the eye.
Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the eyelid lengthwise from the long part down to near the corner, and let your incision be straight in dividing the skin of the eyelid until the white surface, and delicately peel it according to your ability.
Then pierce the sponge full of water through a large hole, and drain all the water, and then put your fingers, and swell the sponge upwards;
And do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the sponge. Cut all or in pieces, however, the sponge very carefully, that if you do not cut it well and wisely, the water will return.
And if the sponge jumps too much at your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the sponge's work.
Then sew the two leaves of the kidney heart together with one stitch, then heal it as you would other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupt with another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood;
then cut the skin all around the suspended area, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
And if water is collected in two parts together, know that these are two veins; then cut the other part in the same way you did the first one, then wipe off the blood, and put a cloth moistened in rose oil on the wound;
then cut the other part in the same way you did the first one, then wipe off the blood, and put a cloth moistened in rose oil on the wound; and put another cloth moistened in wine and oil on top of the two skins, and put double-layered cloths on top of that, and bind it all together with all the bindings as shown in this form:
Then take two cloths, and fill them with wool in the following manner, and they should be sewn together at the waist of the breeches, and one of the ends should extend from the buttocks to the back, and the other to the elbow part;
and the other two ends on the two angles, and let all the assembly be restricted in the belt loop;
and sometimes this bandage is used in place of an iron caustic, and it is that you take a delicate cautery blade, cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white surface containing water is exposed.
then take the cautery in this manner, and pierce that surface at the testicles, and scrape it with this hot delicate blade.
Et pour couper dans toutes les manières que tu peux, autant que tu puisses.
And ensure that the fire does not touch the eye;
and know that this work is safer; and avoid excessive bleeding, and be aware of the operations for cutting.
And if anything goes wrong, such as an abscess or excessive bleeding or something else, then treat what is going wrong, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is frightened and does not wish to undergo this operation because of its horror, then you should make a perforation, as I tell you. It is that when you are certain through the signs that we have mentioned that aquous humor is there, then let the patient sit on a high seat; Punch through the abscess at the base, all around as wide as possible, and place the puncture along the length of the body.
And let the openings be wide so that all the pus flows freely;
Then place cotton on the spot, and bind it, and let the remaining pus flow out. Once the wound is healed, treat it until the wound is clean.
And if the white cloth does not allow the pus to flow out of the wound's mouth, then you must insert a feather or an instrument used to draw water from hydropics, as described earlier.
And widen the opening of the wound, and know that the pus will return, and it will gather again after six months or thereabouts, and when it gathers like before, the patient will pass his days thus.
You should know that in cutting this vein, there is fear in many situations, which is why it seems better to leave it alone.
and I will tell you the work and similarities of an abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come in the body, especially in the joints; and this is in many cases.
This is to say, from an excess of acid or acute humors that spread to the joints, either from a blow; ‌
and the color of the abscess varies according to the color of the body. and if there is no pain, the abscess is serious.
and sometimes an abscess is dangerous and painful, with a red color, and sometimes it comes from a nodule of artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
When it is due to a stoppage of an artery, it is known by the hot swelling of an abscess, when you press it against your fingers. And you should not touch it at all.
That which is caused by an inflammation of the vein is known by its appearance upon being touched by the fingers, and one can make a cut in this manner, as well as in other cases. And it is that you cut the heart of the testicles, then raise the egg up, and make a strong incision in the white, and release the ligament from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already hardened with these scars, then you must draw out the egg and cut it.
And if it is in the air passage, or within a vessel, then you must remove all that substance, and cut it roundly.
And if the base of the flesh is in the posterior place, then you must cut all of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until he is healed.
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a bud, with the softening of the kidneys, and the patient is very sick when he walks.
And the treatment of this disease is almost as dangerous as that mentioned above, and nevertheless, we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then put the suspension of the kidneys down to your feet, at all the vessels near the bladder, and let the master take hold of them, and stretch them very strongly;
Then cut the sputum with a sharp blade across the vessels until they are exposed, and then strip each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with a double thread, and tie it first to where the vein is located, and then tie it again to the other end. Then cut them in half straight across, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt moisture.
Then treat the wound as with others where bone is injured, so that no vessel escapes that nourishes one of the testicles.
For by this no harm comes, and if all the vessels come with blood, then it is necessary to draw out the testicles for all the vessels. if the bird does not lose its nourishment due to the cutting of vessels, it dries up and cannot be helped.
The events of this branch are by the section that comes into the abdomen or the extension on the belly in the part of the groin, for which the intestines descend from this opening to one of the testicles;
and this opening is in the abdomen or the extension of it, and these two types come from many causes.
by striking, or jumping, or falling, or lifting heavy loads, and by similar things.
and the signs when it is an extension of the abdomen are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. And the abscess is equal all the way to the bottom because the pus presses against the intestines.
And the sign is when it is of the section of the hypochondrium, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears diverse, under the skin near, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the body from lack of the hypochondrium.
And sometimes the intestines descend with the intestine and are held back, causing the patient to suffer great pain, especially when pressed.
And in these treatments with iron due to fear, for which it is necessary to avoid them.
And the manner of working is that you instruct the patient to push the intestines back with his hand into the wound, if he can reach it; Then have him lean on his neck between your hands, and lift his thighs;
Then place the heart above, and cut all the skin of the testicles lengthwise. Then insert into the wound of the belly some hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and so that the intestines may come out.
Then scrape off the pus that is under the skin of the testicles until the white hard pus is exposed on all sides.
then place your finger in the hollow that follows the joint, in the one that is between the white fat that is under the skin of the egg, and between the second fat, and separate that which is behind the egg, and between the second fat.
and then move to the right hand inside the heart of the joints, and stretch the white fat up towards your left hand, and lift the egg with all the fat towards the waist. and instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards, and loosen that which is tied behind the ligament.
and check with your fingers if there is any part of the intestines wrapped in the hard white fat, and if you find anything, push it into the belly below.
Then take a needle with a thread made of ten threads, and push it into the rear part of the sinus, which is behind the skin of the knees; below the waist, then cut the threads that appear from the needle until there are four threads remaining; then place them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the sinus, which we have said is below the skin of the knees, with a strong ligature made of two parts. then wrap the threads with more threads and tie them firmly with two parts, so that no foreign body can enter, lest an abscess form there. and place the ligature again according to the first one, two finger-widths from that one, and after these two ligatures leave the sinus which is below the skin of the knees open to the size of a finger. And then all the others according to the roundness of the egg.
Then cut in the part that is under the skin of the knees, so that the blood flows and swells, as we have said before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wounds, and apply the bandage that we have mentioned. And sometimes the white flesh is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bleeding. For this happens often, and leave the bandage until it falls off on its own.
And if it is slow to fall off, then it should be softened with hot water, and apply what we have said until it falls off.
Then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this manner, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done like the cord that is with the bolt, in such a way that you tie the vessels lightly from below after cutting.
then chop inside, and treat the abscess of whoever works, until the patient faints.
and treat it as we have said, until he is healed.
Sometimes the infection reaches the veins, as we have said, and opens up the place.
and none of the intestines should be cut as the kidneys, and if any are cut, it is bad, and they come back every hour.
however, if it lingers too long in this spot, the wound or ulcer swells until the intestines are cut.
and this happens due to the swelling of the ulcer which is in the veins, as we have said, because it expands, then the place becomes softened and inflamed and open. abei
And the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: and let the patient lie on their back between your hands, then cut the swollen place wide according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then remove the pus that is under the skin with a needle, then take a bandage and place it on the visible part of the pus; ️
and press firmly on the belly, then stitch together the two visible parts of the pus at the top of the bandage, and sew one to the other;
then remove the head of the bandage, and do not cut or spread the pus or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal hernia; Then treat by treating the wounds.
Then treat by treating the wounds. And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
The syphilitic person is confined, and there is no appearance of scabs, and the cautery is moved to this place, and it is closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Often the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the contents within are softened, and it can be seen like milk;
And it is necessary that when one wants to treat it, the patient lies on his back and cuts off the softened skin onto the natural skin;
then join the two lips with one stitch, and if you wish, first suture the excess of the softened skin at three or four points firmly.
Then cut between the stitches, and treat as with other wounds until it heals, and let the threads fall off.
Of the castration
Know that castration is abominable in our law, and therefore it pleases me not to speak of it in this book.
et il n’est nécessaire de faire cela que pour deux raisons :
the other is that the physician knows how to answer when asked and knows how to perform the cure;
and the other reason is that we often need to castrate certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, and others.
Therefore, I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
In the method we use by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel them.
About the castration of the tail: It is necessary that you dye the animal, and press its skin with your left hand, then tie the suspension, and cut over each ear once, when you have well flayed them.
And leave some of the subtle fat that is on the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, because in attraction there may remain something of the skin, which causes the animal to desire lust.
Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Of hermaphrodites:
Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men: One way is that between the two testicles there appears as if by nature the figure of a woman, with hair, and sometimes it excretes urine.
And the other manner is in women, and it extends from the wrist like a rod and two fingers.
And the treatment for a man and a woman is that you cut off all the flesh close by, and treat it as other wounds;
in the second manner, of men whose urine passes through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
Tentigen is flesh attached to the natural part, as long as it is too unsightly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
It is necessary that you dye the excess of the tentigen in your hand or with tweezers, and cut it lightly;
and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And at another place which is born at the mouth of the womb, and it fills up, and perhaps it jumps forth, and it resembles a cow, and therefore the ancients called it "cow disease". If it becomes necessary for you to cut it, as we have said about the tendon, then continue the treatment until it is healed.
It is erratic when the woman's nature is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is either natural from birth, or accidental due to a disease that has come upon her.
and it is either natural from birth, or accidental due to a disease that has come upon her. Or it is caused by a nearby growth, or by a subtle or thick secretion, and it is formed deep in the womb, or on the side, or below, wherever it may be.
and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps even menstruation.
And knowledge of this is by looking at the valley.
If the swelling appears near, seek for yourself two or three [remedies].
If it is a subtle syphon, and it is close to two pounds, then hurry, and let it run thus:
put your two fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread;
then let there be the two pounds strongly, so that the subtle syphon runs well, and beware of blocking;
then take wool, wet it with oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman lie down every day, so that it cannot heal.
And if the suture is hard and thick, then you must cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
If the blockage is of natural flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it.
and have the medicines that stop bleeding, such as vinegar, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with plenty of egg; xspace
then bring a wide lead plate, so that the wound cannot heal;
and thus it should be for a long time, and bring him a tent of dry linen;
then he should be treated with other treatments until he is healed.
And when in the flesh comes a tumor, it should be cut according to this manner, unless it is an infected abscess. For an infected abscess that is in the flesh, one should not attempt to cut.
of hemorrhoids Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually have no skin, and when hemorrhoids are old, they become hard;
and we have already said in the division their similarities, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive treatment.
I say that hemorrhoids and thinning, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh and do not appear to touch, then the cure is not by iron.
Those who are at the edge of death, which one can sense, are those whom one can cure.
Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the hard thing with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then sprinkle on powders that restrict blood flow, such as vinegar, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things;
Then put his feet against the wall for an hour, then place him in cold water.
And if bleeding follows, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and galls and similar things; then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make one plaster on his back.
And if he faints, that is good. If not, apply cupping glasses to the back and breasts without pricking.
Then take linen, wet it in plantain juice or hawthorn juice with old wine, and apply to the place.
And when the abscess has subsided, treat the place with onion ointment until it is healed.
And that which is called “albathir” is red, and it resembles a sharp chief, so you must cover it as I have said about the tel. And then let the wound heal completely.
Many kinds of abscesses come in the buttocks, such as chancres and pious abscesses and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other illnesses that I have spoken of in the section on classification.
It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess which comes from the marrow, which is not one of the abscesses that swell up.
And if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is sharp at its beginning and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red if you can see it. Then do not hurry to pierce, but let the abscess mature until the pain is soothed;
And then make the patient sit on the chair, and have two small chairs where he leans back, and place it on his back, and bring his feet together outside the leg.
And let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope.
Then the cup is placed towards the right side, and the instrument with which one works the mouth of the wound, from which later comes the form.
And it is necessary that when you see this instrument being prepared, that you first insert the probe to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not harm the patient. And if the instrument is larger, then it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause harm.
And it is necessary that he places the tip of the instrument above, and that he dips the instrument in.
And when the abscess opens, and one makes an opening with a soft hand, then it should be covered at the top, with warm butter.
And when the abscess is emptied, then you should put in the wound cloths soaked in rose oil or in dry green oil.
And put the cloth firmly at the bottom of the wound, and put another cloth on top of the wound and on the finger a clean cloth soaked in water where mallows have been cooked.
Then the treatment afterwards for two days of dressing until it is healed.
And sometimes lift the skin and the wound with a enema of water and honey, and then with water and lily roots and long Aristolochia cooked Then return to dressing.
And if the wound is festering in the flesh, then you must be careful not to use fire, but treat it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth It is necessary first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman push downwards and desire to smell air:
then the infant hastens to come out by force. then know that this childbirth is according to natural figure, and the issue is under its head, and the second twin with it.
And when you see these signs, then you must gently press on the stomach, so that the child comes out quickly;
because when it descends onto its head, then the afterbirth follows with it, and the mother is purged of her excesses by a good purging.
and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Because sometimes it comes feet first, and forcefully hits the body or head, or the hands, or comes onto its stomach, or back, and is turned by chance onto its neck, or into other evil shapes.
therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skillful in these things, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how she should assist them.
If the child comes out of its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth violently, and the child's strength is weak, then have her sit on a saddle, where women hold her.
and let its nature be of oil or fenugreek, which should be cooked, and then have the woman drink between her teeth the small spatula of this form: and cut open the afterbirth, and scrape at its nail until the moisture that is within flows out.
and press the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to administer an enema to the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and castor oil.
then have her drink and cough with condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour. If one now extracts the child.
And if both hands come out forcefully, then you must reset them lightly a little at a time. and if they cannot go back in, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high. then take the seat to the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when standing up.
and if the hand cannot go back in, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife that was placed before, and extract the child, and reset them equally.
of the child's issue on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, then you must push it upwards; and then turn it little by little until it is even.
Then take of garlic from the feet and stretch a little at a time.
When it reaches the thighs, command to take it and make him sneeze from it; if it goes further, God willing.
And if he does not jump further as we have said, then turn him little by little until he is according to the natural figure. For then he goes easily.
And if it does not go further as we have said, then take mustard seed from alder tree, and oil of sesame, and melted resin, and grind all in a mortar; and apply this mixture on the woman’s genital area both inside and outside of this application, then make her sit in hot water up to below the ribs.
And when she is soaked underneath, give her a potion of honey, and place it underneath her, and leave it for an hour. then have her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press on her belly, for now the child jumps.
Of the child's birth on its knees When the child comes in this manner, then put the midwife's hands there little by little; and let her be supported on her neck, and let her feet hang down, and let her lie on the bed. and bend her hands little by little, and then press the hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from below, until she is prepared to come out. and if the child does not jump, then take her feet and move them strongly, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands there. And breastfeed the child a little at a time; And command the woman to take hold of herself until the child comes out.
Of the child's birth who comes sideways with one hand hanging It is necessary to engineer the return of the hand: If it cannot be brought back, then make the woman rise and walk;
If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and spread her legs widely;
Then bring the midwife that I have mentioned;
And if she does not deliver, then make her sit on a chair, then study to return the hand. And breastfeed the child according to its natural position, and make it sneeze, and command her to take hold of herself until the child comes out forcefully.
from the child issuing on its neck, with hands spread and face turned towards the mother's back It is necessary that the patient hold his hand, then turn it little by little, and wash it gently.
And when it is healed, place on top the natural mucilage of althea and oil, as we have said, then instruct her to move it little by little.
And when you have done this, make her sit on a seat, and instruct her to take hold of herself. And make her sneeze. of this same manner to all the second
of this same manner to all the second When it comes out in this manner to all the mucus, cut the mucus with your nail until the moisture is emptied.
And if the child comes up to his face and neck, cut it from the bottom so that it is not held back, and let the child die.
Then put the child inside, until you have placed him as is necessary, and instruct the woman to take hold of herself.
of the birth of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; And this is not an unusual thing, and it happens rarely. Two are an extraordinary thing, and they do not live, except for a few;
Two are an extraordinary thing, and they do not live, except for a few; I know that if there are many, they are separated by the placenta which divides them, and it is attached to the womb.
And sometimes they come out just as naturally as a single one, as we have said.
And if they come out violently, then care for them as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and do quickly and gently what she does. And make sure to do so for health. of many children
Sometimes they are formed in the womb, one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and all are perfectly formed like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious one. And it is necessary that the doctor knows all this, because perhaps similar things happen to him; Do so accordingly as needed.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman for a dead child or miscarriage, as I have said in the chapter on division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work with your hands; then you must know if the woman is of sound constitution and does not have any accidents or fear of death.
If necessary, let the woman be placed on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
And let the attendant place the cloth in two parts, so that she is tied to the bed and not moved during the birth of the child.
Then anoint the mouth of the woman in labor with moist oil, with a mixture of thyme and fenugreek and flaxseed, then let her wash her hands with these oils and mixtures.
Then gently pour them into the woman in labor, then seek a place where she can put the ointments conveniently, and beware if the child is ready to descend onto her head.
If she puts the ointments in her eyes or neck or mouth or under her tongue or chin or at the navel or near the ribs, and if the delivery is breech, then put them on the anus and in the lower ribs.
and it is necessary that he take the probe in his right hand, and place the tip between the fingers of the left hand, and thrust with all his hand gently, and insert the probe into one of these places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space.
then insert against another probe, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is equal.
and then they are equally tensed by moving from one side to the other, so that it comes out easily, and let the probes be notched for better grip, as shown in this shape:
And if part of it remains, then anoint the tip of one of his fingers with oil, and insert it into that part, and draw out the other part;
And if there remains not a single one, then place this ointment in a higher place, and do so until it all comes out.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned due to tightness, then you must wrap it in a cloth until it all comes out. Then cut the nail at the base of the toe or with scissors, and so must you do for the other hand and the two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it is narrow at the exit, or has sharp pimples gathered on top, then you must insert the sharp tip of a stick between your fingers, pierce the top, and extract the liquid. you will use the instrument called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments in the following chapter.
and do the same if the child has a large head naturally;
then draw out the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and is held by the forceps, it should be cut open until the moisture that is in the worst part comes out.
and if it cannot come out, then chop it into pieces as you can;
and if he is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce him until the moisture flows out.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the adjustment at the mouth of the womb is light.
And if he is swollen in the belly or the bladder, then you must extract it with a cloth wrapped around your hand. And make a cut in the belly or the breast, until the moisture within is removed.
And if other members are taken away and the head remains, then the bailiff should put his hand into the marrow, and draw it out to the mouth of the marrow. Then he puts in one or two more, and draws them strongly;
And if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by the hot abscess that has formed there, then it should not be probed, but rather moist and fatty things should be applied. And the healer applies plasters and sieves in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is out of its position, and you can put it back in place, then treat it as we have said for a living child.
And if one does not have power to remove it whole, then draw it out piece by piece, and leave nothing of the arrowhead.
And when you have done this, if the arrow comes into one of those abscesses that come in the flesh;
and if blood flows out, put it in boiling water to stop the bleeding, and apply other treatments to the arrow.
And I saw a woman in whose womb one child had died, then another was born on top of it, and the other also died. After a long time, an abscess came to her womb, and it swelled so much that it burst, and she began to have great stench.
I was called to the care, and there I thought for a long time, but the wound could not be healed.
I placed a strong attracting plaster on it, and from it came out a bone, and after some days another one. I was greatly amazed by this, for the belly has no bones.
Then I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I explored the wound, and drew out many bones until the woman was in a better state; and the woman lived for a long time thus, and only occasionally did a little pus come out from the place.
and I have included this chapter only because when the master finds something strange, he should know how to help with it.
Here comes the form of the press, to which one turns the books;
and with two windings as two heads of two ropes. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor, and should be made of ivory or boxwood;
and the opening of the wood should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees one finger, and in length a palm and a half; and between the two ropes should be two adjustments of this same wood, which are fastened on one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two adjustments are pushed into the opening of the margin to open when one turns the two horns.
A different form, more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs. And it should have two heads and two adjustments, as you see, one palm long and two fingers wide;
And when you see the instrument open completely, make the woman sit on the bed with her feet hanging and legs spread, then place the two adjustments together in the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her thighs. Then work your hand on the entire instrument, just as you did with the tongs, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the vagina, until the cavity does what it wants.
This tool is all-encompassing, and its likenesses are many. And when the surgeon has prepared them, then the work is more swift, and greater for men due to their quantity.
Do not destroy the instrument before you have prepared it, because its needs are not negligible.
When the placenta is retained after childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze forcefully, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; And if she jumps because of this, it is good.
If not, then take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put in herbs that can open the mother's mouth, such as hartwort, rue, anise, chamomile, cascara, and southernwood. All these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in water on the fire;
Then place a reed or hole in the pot, and the other end in the patient's mouth, and hold it until the steam enters the patient's mouth;
then make them sneeze, as we have said. Si il saute rapidement la deuxième fois.
And if she remains after this treatment and is not cured, then instruct the patient to moisten her left hand in mustard oil or althaea mucilage, and then insert it into the vagina, and seek a midwife. and when she has found one, then take hold of it and pull it out little by little straight away, so that the patient does not twist during the extraction.
But it must be moved gently to the right and left, then pull. It will come out and dislocate.
And if the mouth of the womb is narrowly constricted, we have said the treatment is sneezing and fumigating with herbs.
And if it does not come out from all that we have said, take care not to be foolish in pulling.
But it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the womb, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then give her an enema with four-substance ointment. Then she will fart and return it, and it will come out forcefully.
But nevertheless, when she farts, it causes a bad smell in the stomach and head, and injures the patient. Si therefore, it is necessary for appropriate fumigations to this:
any of the ancients have proven fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for retaining the flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
And it should be like a sieve, with the fine part facing the patient and the wide parts over the fire;
and let the fumigation be on the coals, and continue until the mange is destroyed, and then begin again with a new one.
Many children are born whose anus is not open, but rather is obstructed by a fine membrane: therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that membrane with her finger, and not with an acute probe, and take care that she does not touch the intestine with it;
Then place a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with unguent until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not heal properly, place a lead plug in the hole, and leave it for several days, and have it removed when the child wants to go to bed.
And sometimes this obstruction comes from the sudden healing of a wound or abscess; then it is necessary to cover that sudden occurrence: if it is treated, as we have said about the resin of fir.
Fistulas that come under the anus are nodular and swollen, which come near the anus or in the space of the two parts, if one has a fistula or several;
and when that nodulation is old, it works, and in addition, moisture produces white or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
And they are known by this: that there is vomiting or flatulence when the patient vomits, and sometimes it may be a stone.
And if there are fistulas that penetrate to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and they reach as far as the hip joint, and even to the testicle.
And thus one knows the fistula penetrating the anus, and not penetrating: and it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity, then insert a thin tent of lead, or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no excretion of feces or flatulence or bile, as we have said: know that it does not break through; if you hurry to cure it.
And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the passage of the urine, then the urine leaks out and cannot be healed by medications.
If it breaks through to the hip joint, then the tendon comes to its place; if there is twisting and the sensation of pain around it, then it will always protrude, and neither medicine nor suturing by sewing helps;
and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except hard work, and the foolishness of the doctors who meddle with them.
In those that are not Persian and not old, there is hope of health by iron, as I have proven, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
And let him raise his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined towards his belly. then put an iron tent, or of lead if there is torment, so that you know where the tent comes.
If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, if you feel that the tent has pierced through;
and is revealed where you feel between your finger the pus or flesh, then know that it is perforated. if one does not travel there, for it cannot be healed.
One says however that some can be well healed, but this happens rarely;
and the aid that one does there is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before. And he pours all hot into the fistula, until it reaches near the anus; And do this two or three times, so that you know these hairs are burned, which resemble a bird feather;
And then treat it with moist compresses of butter, so that this hair comes out, then treat it with a greasy ointment and seal it.
If he is thus healed, it is good.
If so, it cannot be healed in any other way;
And if the tent enters and does not pierce through to the finger that is in the anus, and there is a thick covering of hair or silk between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula at the place where the covering ends; if at the beginning of the fistula, and always push the tent forward, and then after the cautery, until it reaches the end of the tent. and the tent will be released, and it will fall;
then remove those charred parts that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
And if the blood flows, and passes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with astringent medicine.
Because the fire cautery combines two good things: that is to say, the burning of those charred parts, and the arresting of blood and drying out of moisture.
then treat wet tents with butter or powdered substance, until the place swells up, and the charred parts come out of the swelling;
Then heal the wound with immediate, quick-acting remedies that harden the flesh, and these remedies are dry.
Car when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula reaches completely to the anus and is separated from the body, then push your finger into the anus and seek for it there.
If you feel the tent (and between II is the fabric or silk or cloth), where it is close to piercing, there should be no holes except for a path of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the III ways:
Or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut to the bottom, or if you can, put tents there and treat as before;
And do not go too deep, lest you cut the tissue that holds the foundation, and uncontrolled bleeding occurs. Then treat it as we have said;
Then treat it as we have said; By chance, it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the foundation, either by tent or by another suitable instrument. then cleanse that foul flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can; then strive to restore the wound and to close the fistula in the part below the foundation.
then strive to restore the wound and to close the fistula in the part below the foundation. this would be less painful for the patient.
And sometimes there are fistulas according to this manner: and when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the tip in this manner: And put a twisted thread in it, and push the tent along with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
If it is going through the edge of the foundation inside, then draw out the thread of that hole, so that you insert your finger into the foundation.
And pull the head of the thread, and gather the two heads together, and press them against each other, and leave it for one day or two.
And restrain it several times, until the thread cuts these sutures that are between them, and fall out;
then heal the wound until it is healed and cured.
If the fistula does not break through, have it pierced in every way that you can, unless it is too deeply embedded. Because it is not appropriate to cover the wound for the binding if it is too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it heals.
The form of the thorny cautery with which one makes the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not, so that one does not cut that which should not be cut, as you see here.
There are two kinds of emorydes: either they are inside the anus, like seeds of pine, and there may be small or large ones, and blood always flows from them, and there may be one or several, and they protrude outside the anus and at the opening of the anus.
But those which are without have little moisture, yet still sometimes a little green water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body.
And the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is such that you instruct the patient to strain himself to go into rooms until the anus excretes them, and the threads appear. If you are quick, then seize it with tweezers or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots.
And if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a small cloth or cotton, or a piece of camlet. And pull them with your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders that are available for cautery on top. or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then continue with other treatments until they are healed;
and if the fundament cannot pass, then give the patient an enema with harsh and bitter clyster to cleanse what is in the fundament, so that it may pass freely; when the patient takes it, and if the feces are hard near the fundament, then the treatment is light;
when the patient takes it, and if the feces are hard near the fundament, then the treatment is light; and it is that you take them with your nail or with tweezers, and cut them, then treat as we have said, until they are healed, and that they avoid cutting with iron. So you must apply the treatment in this manner:
So you must apply the treatment in this manner: Pull I thread twisted, and put it in a needle, then draw the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide.
And hold the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one for draining the excess blood.
Then place a wet cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the wound, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then leave it until it heals, and when it has healed, treat it with ointment and other treatments, until it is healed.
Of dryness of the intestines or rectum Many times there is dryness in the intestines due to natural constraint and when the illness is old and medicine is of no use. If you must, use the tip of a spatula or your nail to scrape off the scab on top, so that it does not become wet. then cure it until it is dried as required;
and if it cannot dry, then renew the scraping more strongly than before, until it bleeds profusely and is scraped clean; then cure it until it is healed.
Of trembling An insect is a small creature found under the skin, and goes very deep into it;
sometimes the cold finds it, and one feels it as if frozen to death with shivering, and this happens throughout the body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is such that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong ox feather, and place this quill on the shivering, so that the circle of redness surrounds the shivering entirely; Then turn your hand along the whole chain until you cut all around the trembling, and put it in completely, and pull out the trembling from its roots.
And if you see it this way, then do so with a cane of brass or iron in this form, and let it be sharp below and drawn above: Do not pierce, to hold it at two, and press it together.
And if you see it, then cauterize the trembling as described in the chapter on cautery.
Sometimes a clyster is made of silver or gold, or melted bronze or iron.
And sometimes these instruments are made in small and large sizes, according to those for whom they are intended. Therefore, those [instruments] that are prepared for the treatment of children who are weak and in pain are small.
Therefore, those [instruments] that are prepared for the treatment of children who are weak and in pain are small. The shape of the small and large enema is thus wide at the top, where the stomach is tied like this:
And if there is a rupture where the stomach is tied as you see, and the head is pierced inside;
And let there be on one side two holes, and on the other one.
And let the bag where the medicines are placed be made of an animal's bladder or parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and let there be a finger's width between each hole. Then put into these holes a strong thread of twisted silk in the shape of an X or O, and gather the bag like a purse; And when the medicines are inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then enema.
and this is the shape of a circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then insert it lightly. then the minister should press with both hands together until it is completely empty; then extract the enema, and have the patient raise their legs against the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, hold it as long as possible; And if he sleeps all night through, the aid is even greater.
And if you enema him in illness of a prolapsed belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids in the anus or abscess, let the enema be as fine as for a child of one year.
and this is the form of the subtle enema which requires the skin to be tight:
We have already said in the section on wound treatment;
or we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les blessures peuvent être causées par la chute de pierres, ou par des coups d'épée et de couteau, ou de lance, ou de bâton, ou de flèche, ou par des choses similaires.
ou qui dépendent de la localisation dans le corps, comme une blessure sur le cou, ou sur la tête, ou sur les pieds, ou sur l'estomac, ou sur le foie, ainsi que d'autres parties similaires.
Et je vous expliquerai le traitement pour chaque blessure, et je commencerai par les blessures simples de la tête, car leur traitement sera rappelé dans ce chapitre.
Je dis que lorsqu'une simple blessure survient à la tête et que l'os n'est pas brisé, il faut faire attention si elle a été causée par la chute de pierres ou des choses similaires. Même si le cuir est rompu et que la blessure est grande, et que tu crains légèrement qu'un abcès se forme : if he does so immediately bleed from the head itself, even if a little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite to the injured part;
and have the patient avoid overeating wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not want to bleed, let his food be reduced, and he should drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
and place on the wound, if an abscess appears there, cotton soaked in rose oil alone, or in stiffened wine.
and if there is no hot abscess, then place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
And if the fire has moved it, apply some ointments until he is healed.
Et si la plaie est grande comme celle d'une tailleuse d'épée et semblable, et les lèvres ne peuvent pas se réunir par tentes, alors réunissez-les par couture, comme je le dirai pour les plaies du ventre, de la couture.
If the wound is exposed to the bone, and hollowed out, and holds only by a little, then cut it off; then treat the wound with medicine, and replace the skin with hard flesh, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, likewise bones, and similar things.
And if you find rottenness in the skin, and it does not reach to the bone, then cut away all the rottenness, cast it out, and then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped by cutting it off, and it cannot be stanched with medicines, then seek the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: And it is that you put this powder in before the fire has moved it.
And the manner of the powder is thus: take incense, one part; blood of dragon, two parts; quicklime, three parts, and make the powder very fine, and fill the wound, and bind it strongly, so that it swells well and adheres to all its blood;
And then bandage it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell; For one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this only with quicklime, when one has neither frankincense nor dragon's blood, but the fire has moved the wound.
And if the fire has moved the wound, even if it was summer, then do not put this powder on it at all.
but apply some soothing salves, or poultices made from barley flour with water and honey, until it produces pus. then treat the wound with other remedies until it is healed.
And if there is a bone fracture along with the wound and it is small, then draw it out with fine forceps.
and I will tell you about skull fractures later on.
from the neck wound
If the wound is in the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head; but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
If it is a nerve, then there is no other treatment than to leave it alone and not put anything constricting on it, for it harms the nerves and causes them to recede. And do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and cut herbs likewise in soft water, and other small stones according to this manner, and moist onions.
And if the wound is large, sew it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it heals.
And if the wounds are deep and it is swollen and full of pus, then pierce it in a lower place.
and if an artery is cut and blood flows out of it, then dry it up, bind it, and cauterize it if necessary.
and if the windpipe of the throat is cut or the heart, and the passage is kept safe, so that food can pass through, then sew the skin over the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back in its natural shape. And then he restrains it properly, and leaves it for some days, then treats it with dry onions until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then he should pierce it; And if there are bone fragments, then extract them all if you can, and those that you cannot obtain, leave them until the wound suppurates, and let the opening drain and heal.
And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned. And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
If it is a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then see if there is any gas coming out of the wound as the patient exhales: Know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder in at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that may bite deeply and return to the heart and kill the patient; but put an attracting poultice on it and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have a poultice, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then there will be no spasm, no evil trembling of the heart, nor swelling from the wound; And when you see the bones in their proper position, know that the wound is healed. Heal it then with tents and other treatments, until it is healed;
and if it cannot heal, and works, know that there is a fistula.
so treat it as one should. And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it is simple, either worse or on the back, treat it as you would for one in front. if it is large, stitch it up;
and if it is small, with powder, and if it presses against the bone and has splintered, seek the wound, and remove the foreign bodies if they are visible. And if they are not drained, let the wound fester, thus making the extraction easier;
And for other wounds in other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
Of the rupture of the belly
The rupture of the belly is large and medium and small;
of the large wound sometimes the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, come out, by which their introduction;
and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because it is harder to put the intestines back in, unless they are done one by one;
because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, and so it is harder to put them back in, and therefore the medium-sized wound is worse, because one moves the intestines to their place less than the other two.
And know that belly rumbling is according to four ways:
the two common sutures occur in the belly suture and in the sutures of other wounds of the body, and the other two proper sutures are common to other wounds;
and yet they are more specific with the belly suture, and I will say each one and explain.
I say that when the wound is small and something of the intestines has come out, and this thing is difficult to put back in, it is by one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Soak a sponge or a cloth in hot water only, where you cook in boiling water with wormwood and hyssop and spikenard, and rinse the intestines until the swelling has subsided.
And sometimes make this wine constricting, and it is better to use alone for reducing inflammation.
And when you see the swelling subside, then moisten the intestines with water where mallows and hollyhocks have been cooked, for by this means the entry is made easier by a little.
And if it cannot enter, then make a small opening in the wound with the instrument used for removing hemorrhoids;
And the first treatment is better than cutting, because no one should cut unless there is great necessity.
And this is the instrument to split it:
if you cut inside the curve and not outside, and see here the form: And when the wound is opened and the intestines leap out, then reset them carefully according to their natural form in their proper place, if you can, for this is better.
When the wound is wide and it is in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, place the head and the feet higher than the lower parts, and also if the wound of the belly is in one of the two parts, direct your attention so that the injured part is higher than the other;
And thus you must proceed as I have said for large and medium wounds.
In small wounds, apply what you have prepared, then have in your hands a skillful minister who can hold all the wound at his hand, and bring together the lips;
and that is the common manner of stitching, and it is that you take one or more needles, according to the width of the wound, then from the head of the wound leave two spaces, and there insert a needle with which to have a good strong thread. and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the hypodermis, which is under the skin inside, until you have it pierced from that part, and assemble the two heads of the hypodermis together in four.
then pull a double thread around the needle of two parts, then gather the two heads of the wound together, and then leave two spaces, and there insert another needle.
then take the thread of the needle just as you made the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need for the needles, until all the wounds are constrained;
and let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick, for fine needles cut all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well; therefore they must be medium.
and it is not good to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and open the wound before the stitching.
and then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not wound the patient while sleeping, and put bandages or cloths over the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them there until the wound is healed.
And this manner of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it requires only one or two needles.
The second stitch is common and is done by bringing together the two edges of skin and the two lips of flesh with one needle, threaded with a strong middle-sized silk.
And when you have pierced all four edges together, then pull the needle back to the place where you began, in the manner that clothes are sewn.
And leave a space between each stitch as thick as a minor finger.
This stitching is approved by men, and I sewed up a wound that a man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and the intestines protruded about two palms, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je remis son intestin après qu'il avait été en dehors pendant vingt-quatre heures, puis je pansai la plaie jusqu'au quinzième jour, et ensuite je soignai la plaie, et il fut guéri.
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
And I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. And I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
Take the needle and pass it from the outside to the inside.
When it has pierced the skin from inside to outside, leave the tip of the thread or suture where you passed the needle, and have it pierce from the other side, from inside out.
And the understanding of this suture is that you sew as the furrier makes the furs, and that you leave the thread on one side once, and take it up again on the other, until the stitch is entirely completed.
The second method of suturing, which Galen calls properly, is like some do, who join the two parts naturally together and apply one end of the thread to the other end in this manner:
Insert a needle into the nearer end of the thread and make it pierce only that spot, leaving the two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outer part to the inner part at the two ends of the thread;
Then make one of them pierce through from the outside part to the inside, in two other places on the mirror that are opposite each other.
and this is the most common method of stitching.
Galen said these words, and some testify to this, that one should stitch the belly with two needles, each having thread.
and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew belts.
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, then the stitching is more difficult than in other places on the abdomen.
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
And it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, before the fire has moved it, then stop applying heat to the intestines and the skin.
then apply soothing powder, and if the fire has moved it, then apply some ointment that is available, until the wound heals. and stitch the skin, and close the sinuses, and the intestines. then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
and if you do not have medicine, then apply, as soon as it begins to heal, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For in many cases, no other medicine is needed when the wounds are simple;
And if you doubt that the wound will spread to the main limbs, then you must wet a light linen cloth in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints and under the armpits.
And if he feels pain or inflammation in the belly, which often happens, then give him an enema of warm red wine, and likewise if the inflammation reaches the intestines.
And puncture it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is injured, and this is because of the thinness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the intestine protrudes from the wound, then replace it back in as with the intestine, while it is fresh.
And if the hairs are old and turned gray or black, then you must tie the blackened area so that blood does not flow there, because there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is between the tie, and place the two heads hanging from the lower part of the wound until it is sufficient to ease the extraction when the hairs fall, and the wound closes.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
When the intestines are cut and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some men, for I have seen that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became ulcerated and turned into a fistula, from which issued the excrement and the flatulence;
I took care of it according to what I could, and did not stop until it was healed, and the wound closed.
And when I saw that it was sealed, I feared that the patient had an ailment in his stomach; and there was no illness there, but he remained in better health, eating and drinking.
and some experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in this manner: take a bandage with large ends, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the bandage has opened its mouth, place it on top of the two lips, so that it pulls its mouth shut;
and then cut the end of the bandage, and this holds so that it cannot be loosened, then place another bandage afterwards in the same manner as before, until the entire wound is completely covered. and cauterize the wound.
And these heads, if they remain in the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, then one can tie off the intestines with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal, in this manner:
take the head of this intestinal thread and make it very thin, then tie to the head of this thread a fine twisted linen thread, then put the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestines, and return it to its place;
and this manner of stitching for fractures is nothing other than according to the way of trust and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the narrow intestines, there is no skill or sense, except for subtlety.
Of a fistula wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it has healed, is universally called "fistula," and also when it has burst and flows with pus.
And a fistula is according to the truth a hard and white knot, where one does not feel pain, and it is as deep as the feather of a bird;
and sometimes it appears clear and shallow, and other times thick; sometimes it is hollow, and other times filled;
And I have spoken of it in the section on wounds that every wound which is not healed and has no flesh, it is not cured except for one of the NINE causes: that is to say, by the scantiness of blood or flesh; or because of its defectiveness; or because there is hard flesh within it, and on the edges, which prevents new flesh from growing; ?> where there is too much moisture; where the place is rotten, and the substance is of poor quality; where the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a manner of plague; or because the property in the region delays digestion and healing, and is swollen by nature; or there are veins in the bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or it is necessary that I make you know the treatment of fistula which is made by handiwork.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the face, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spinal column of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; 》 And so it happens to some where it reaches the property of the principal member, and similar places.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of serious illness, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
And if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have said, and you trust in the cure, and you wish to test it, then take a tent of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, then pierce it;
And if the fistula is crooked, then seek a subtle tent of pine, for pine bends more easily around the curvature.
And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot easily probe it with tents, then administer an enema through one of the openings, for moisture thus passes from one opening to another, and cleanses it.
Then wisely and with all your power, examine if there is bone or nerve, and it is cut deeply. Ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand, and where he feels it;
And when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the putrefaction and the corrupt flesh that are within;
And then treat it until it is healed. And if the fistula is well deep and straight, it is necessary that you cut deeply, as much as you can, then put moist tents in ague medicine, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
And then put on dressings of fresh meat, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this method, then cauterize as we have said; and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it off.
If veins or nerves trouble you in the main members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then clean it until all the corruption is removed, then treat with fresh meat dressings until it is healed.
and if it does not heal, and pus comes out again as before, know that you have not reached the source.
search and dig until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then fill the place.
And if he is thus healed, it is good. If not, know that the corruption is too far advanced, that you cannot help it; there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
and if there is a little rotten bone, and you can pull it out with tweezers, then draw it out with the suitable instrument, and if there are many bones, then pull them all out, leaving not one;
and if moisture hinders you and there is no mistake or fear, then cut flesh, moisture, and skin, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then apply a purifying agent to the wound, and let it sit until the place around the bones is rotten, and then the bones will be easier to extract; 
And if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, then clean away the corruption until all the blackness is gone, then restore the wound.
And if there is a large part of it that is corrupt and reaches to the marrow of the bone; then you must cut and scrape all the way to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed.
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to an internal cause, so that the matter came out into the leg and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no other reason for opening it.
But the doctors in their foolishness worked so much that they opened the abscess, and from it flowed much matter, and a fistula formed, and there came much pus that all threw off stench and moisture of the body.
and many doctors tried to treat it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine, so that I was called upon, and saw his leg and the medications with which he was treated, and what flowed from the holes in great quantity. and the young man's body turned red, and had a lemon-yellow hue.
Je planted a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that one met the other from all parts of the leg.
So I hurried and cut into one of the holes until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the rot reached the inside of the bone.
I was that which appeared to me from the corrupt bone, and I thought there was no other corruption except for what I removed.
and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, but it could not heal.
and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I saw it, and then removed it, and tried to heal the place. but I could not do so until I cut around a palm's width of the bone, and then pulled it out entirely, after which I treated it with medicines. and it healed and was joined quickly, and I did not need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and because of my fear of his death. Car for the evacuation of blood he often fainted, but he was completely healed, and in place of the bone grew hard flesh, which had a good disposition and caused no harm or opposition at all, neither when leaving nor when arriving.
And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: Take a thread, and tie it to the end of the bone that is exposed, and instruct someone to pull it upward; and place another thicker wool thread above the first thread on the flesh above the bone, and extend the end so that you draw the corrupted flesh downward, and expose the flesh in the place where you wish to treat, ensuring that the thread does not injure the flesh;
and place a hot coal or on a table under the bone to further burn the corrupted flesh;
and one must treat until the corruption can be seen and felt, and then treat it again another time.
And if the bone is corrupt, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh.
Then place a burning coal underneath, and then sew from one part to the other where the corruption is, and let the suture be as long as the length of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupt joint and sew the bone where it attaches to the other part.
And if the corruption is between two joints, there is no other remedy than to cut it out.
And if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or in the ankle of the foot, this thing is very difficult, but nevertheless you must seek to discover how it opens. And cleanse it in all ways you can, but let not the vein or nerve do otherwise;
And know that the incision tools and the brushes for covering these bones are many, according to the placement of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; And therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of work its instrument;
And know that the work will show you the instrument of which you will have need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; If you think of the instrument that you need according to what is necessary.
The head becomes dislocated either due to an internal cause or due to an external cause;
and when you have treated that corruption with the remedy of medicines, and they do not profit at all, then it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death, or the greater evil of the defect of the limb;
and the signs of this are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corruption passes from one member to another, and spreads throughout the body;
so hasten to amputate, and if it is due to the bite of some venomous creatures, such as sea scorpions or vipers, and similar ones, if the corruption is at the top of the arm, then cut it off, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, cut it at the joint, so that the rotting does not reach the arm;
and if it reaches the arm, cut it with a knife;
and if it goes beyond the knife, death occurs, and no other remedy is of use except in accordance with its power.
and thus do you act when the rotting comes to the foot: if it reaches the first joint, cut after the other joint;
and if it reaches the foot, cut off the entire foot; and if it rises to the leg, cut at the knee joint;
and if it reaches above the knee, there is no other course than to leave the patient to die.
And the manner of covering or binding the limb is such that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister downward along one of the ligaments, and another minister upward along the other ligament, and you divide the flesh between the two ligaments into a broad spatula, until the bone is exposed;
then bind or tie, and place on each side a linen cloth, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy area, and the patient will have another injury and an abscess there.
And if blood begins to flow when you work, cauterize the area quickly, or apply some restricting powders.
then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals.
And I will tell you what happened to a man on his feet
There came a blackness upon him that seemed like a burn from fire, and this corruption first came in his big toe, so much so that it spread to the entire foot
And when the man saw the corruption, he hurried to cover the foot, and was saved
And a long time after the corruption returned to the toe of his hand, and he came to me, and I put on repressive things after the cleansing of the body, and still the corruption could not cease  :
And he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, because I hoped to suppress the matter And I also feared that if I cut off his hand he would die, for the man's vitality was weak
And he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and covered his hand, and was healed.
And I have not told this account except for what one does with another part, if one needs it.
Sometimes an abscess comes to a fleshy place, and stays there so long that it causes a great swelling; And then it breaks through and bursts, and the swelling jumps out, and the place remains hollow, like a vessel. And the skin that is above it is as thin as a well-woven cloth, and does not extend to the bone or the nerve. Such an illness is called "sinus", and is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusques à l’os en parfont, si est appelée «fistule»;
et li cuirs s'est endurci de telle manière que tu dois couper ce cuir tout autour, et même quand il est fin, comme un ruban. et ne s’aggrave pas à cause de son infection.
And if you believe that the skin is getting worse, and the infection is not severe, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with an enema like this:
examine if the breast is large and the pus coming out of it smells foul; then treat it with an Egyptian medicine enema made thus: Take asafetida, oil, and lead oxide, in equal parts, and put to cook in a vessel over the fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey.
And then take some of this according to your need, and make it into water or honey, and use it as an enema in the chest, and constrict the anus. And let the medicine remain inside for two hours, then remove it by pressing out.
Do this many times until the chest is cleaned and the pus is removed.
And sometimes you should use an enema of ash water when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from vine wood, and pour water over them, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know that the chest is well cleaned.
And if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes, then enema with water and honey in which there is a little bit of lead powder. or you enema with honey and mulled wine, so that the honey has the property of cleaning and washing, and the wine makes the flesh drier;
and when you have done this, and you are confident that the wound is well cleaned, then enema with what causes flesh to grow in it, and that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine.
or you enema with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken the properties in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the breast is small, and the pipe of the enema cannot enter, then widen it a little with an iron, and place inside a tent of Egyptian ointment or Basilicon ointment, until it is widened.
And if the wound is too large, then sew it and leave an opening only where the enema can enter; and if the hole that the intestine exits is high up, then cut it lower down where it is.
And if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then prepare it in such a way that the intestine runs to the lowest part of it; for when the intestine is whole, do not let any flesh enter. And if you cannot cut the breast as you wish, then prepare it in this manner: What li bowe means
What li bowe means Et puis metez sor le plaie un drap de lin pur, puis coveint que tu face tant de drapiax come tu veux ainz que tu aies mangié ne béüs;
et s’il est venimous ou malade, ou trop, ou digeste, ou non digeste;
et se li sieins est apert, et li santés approchiers.
And then unbind it in the morning or on the third day; and when you unbind the wound, change the dressing and renew the ointment.
And if subtle poison comes out after a long time, do not despair of your health, for the health is approaching.
For there are men in whom it takes a long time for flesh to grow over their wounds, and others who do the opposite;
And if undigested food comes up from the stomach after many days, know that the stomach does not open.
And if the stomach is slow to open and is constipated, use drying medicines that are moist in nature but dry in action, such as refined ointment, for it contains a great deal of vitriol, and this is the last medicine.
Take refined ointment, and make it with rose oil, and mix it with equal parts of old wine in substance;
Then crush it and use it.
And the same thing, when onions are not present, you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and crush them, and sprinkle the powder over honey when it is on the fire.
And then put it in a cloth and place it on the chest, and sometimes add a long clyster, and roots of heavenly iris, which are like vetch flour and fenugreek. And use either simple or compound medicines: Crush them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it.
And if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and has made an impression on the bone, or on hard members, or on joints. If the cure of the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
Panarice is an abscess that occurs beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or sometimes in other places;
and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then an abscess like this forms, and it runs and throws pus so much that it runs to the root of the nail, and sometimes it runs all the way through.
and the corruption reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the tip of the finger or toe is swollen, and its color is red.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail with an iron instrument, and then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cautery is very helpful if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
And if the nail presses into the flesh and begins to prick and wound it, you must place a reed under the nail that touches the flesh, and push it upward, and carefully and lightly cut off the flesh, and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then cure with onion until it is healed.
And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and draw strongly, for as long as the corrupt bone remains, it cannot heal;
and if you see the finger corrupted, cut off one of the fingers as previously said, then cure it until it is healed;
and if it is struck or bruised and causes great pain, you must first heal it.
Then cut the nail of the big toe obliquely from above, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, place something on top to soothe it.
The two bones that grow in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and sometimes there is one with bone, and sometimes there is a claw; and sometimes they grow at the root of the joint, where the growth appears on some fingers.
He who is born under any knuckle of the toe does not move, and he who is born at the toe's joint, perhaps moves;
The cut of one who is fleshy is light in this manner: Cut it at the root with a wide spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to cure: xspace so hold yourself from cutting (it).
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes primer la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.
The sudden meeting of the two [bones] occurs at birth, or from a wound, or from burning with fire, or similar things.
You must cut that suture in such a way that they may be reconnected according to their natural shapes. xspace ‌ Then place between two tents or wet cloths with rose oil, so they do not stick together. Or you put between two thin pieces of lead until the place is healed as it should be.
If suddenly it happens to one of his fingers with the palm, then strike that knot as is necessary.
The veins are large wounds full of excessive black bile, which come to many members of the body;
and it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things than in others.
It is therefore necessary that you administer some purging of bile to him, and then heal him with basilicum.
The treatment of iron is according to two methods: one is that they are cut out and strong black blood is drawn from them. And the other method is to raise the wound and draw it all strongly.
The cut is according to this method: rose the first the leg of hot water very strongly, so that the large vein be made subtle, then hold the leg of the patient from above the thigh to below the knee.
then cut the vein in one place, or in two or three, with a wide incision, then lift up and draw out strongly the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can bear.
and then bandage it, and command him to eat blackening foods.
and repeat the evacuation and cautery when the veins are full, and benefit the patient.
The raising of it is according to this manner: Pull the hair from the patient's leg if there is much of it, then place it in a bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it turns red, and open the veins.
And if you do not have a bath, then heat it over the fire, and then cut towards the vein along the length of the leg from the knee to below the ankle.
Then cut through the skin with scissors, and scrape the vein from both sides until it appears when touched.
And one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white cord.
Then push the blood downwards so that it is raised from the skin, and then cut it lightly with scissors, then cut in another place above three fingers.
Then peel back the skin on the vein until it appears, then lift it with the razor, as you have done, and attach it to another hook, as you have done first;
Then make another cut, or several if you need them, then lift it and cut to the foot's big toe, then draw it and lift up to the second cut;
Then pull it from cut to cut until it comes out completely, then cut it off.
And if you cannot pull and lift it out, then thrust a very strong double-threaded needle into it, tie it off and pull, place it under the skin, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out. And watch that it does not cut, for if it cuts, then one cannot draw or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient.
And when you have drawn it all out, then place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound site. And tend to it until it is healed.
And if the vessel is twisted and bent together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it obliquely, but do not cut it. And draw it out as we have previously said.
The shape of the iron used to cut the vessel is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cut the vein; ‌
And it is of large size, for if it were fine, it would cover the vein; but let it be thick as we have said. Here is its form:
This vein is found in the legs, in hot places where no grass or tree grows, and on dry land.
And perhaps it appears elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes under the skin, just as snakes and worms appear inside the body, lodged between the skin and the flesh.
And if the sign of the beginning of this vein is such that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the place changes, and the vein begins to come out like the root of a plant.
When the head opens, it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of cloth from one and a half cubits up to two and a half cubits, and the knot, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg. And every time that some pus comes out, wrap the cloth around it and the knot;
And if it is too long, then cut off part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cut it at its root, until all of it has come out. for if you cut it, then it enters the flesh and causes an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad disease.
because of this thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the head, and nothing remains in the body.
and sometimes this vein when treated is fifteen palms or twenty long, and a man came to me once whose it issued twenty palms long, and when you cut it, then it spurts out one or two streams, and pierce it until the bottom, so that all of it comes out.
And let the matter that is within be emptied out, and apply to the place medications that prevent putrefaction every day, then treat it as you would with abscesses.
And sometimes this vein is smaller, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot, and there is much pus, causing swelling.
Treat it then as we have said before.
worms that are born between skin and flesh This disease is called in our land "ox disease," because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, traveling throughout the body up and down, and one feels it well as it moves from limb to limb until it desiccates the skin where it goes, causing swelling.
And is infected by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, serpents, and roundworms or ascariasis in the belly;
And one doubts his wickedness, for when he goes through the body, and he rises to the head, and he comes to the eye, perhaps he enters, and destroys the eye; And this happens often.
When you see him cured and drawn out, one cannot avoid it except when he goes away:
Then it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong bandage very tightly, then cut into it and pull him out strongly, and if the worm is deeply in the flesh, and you cannot find him, then cauterize him with fire until he dies;
and the greatest harm that it does is that it affects the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming near the eye towards the head, hold firmly beneath it the bone, then cut above, and pull out the arrow forcefully;
and it is necessary to use the patient for body cleansing with dissolving medicines for bad humors, and to abstain from foods that cause putrefaction.
of the pain that comes from flatulence This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then moves from one limb to another;
and I saw what I tell you. I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
And afterwards, the wound swells up on the shoulder like a worm, faster than anything else, just like quicksilver when it changes place.
The pain leaves that spot and lodges in the shoulder, and then a little afterwards it runs throughout the body until it reaches the other arm;
Then she told me that it continually moved around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me merveille beaucoup comment elle se déplace ainsi d'un membre à l'autre, car je n'ai jamais vu cette maladie de cette façon auparavant. However, I had seen many who had well experienced pain moving from one place to another, but I had never seen it as I did in the woman;
and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and for this reason these windy constriction appeared.
And do not follow this method for those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and full veins.
And when you see that this disease is being treated and the patient feels this pain, if it appears as we have said, then apply quickly above and below, and then cut into it until that windy pressure forces out from its place. And cauterize the place;
And if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those that expel windiness, such as stinking pills and pills of serpentaria, and similar others.
The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places on the body where they strike.
The diversity of them is such that there are some with large tips, and small ones, and hooked ones, and joined ones. And of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are parts.
And that which falls upon any member does so in two ways: Or it falls upon a principal member, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidney, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls therefore upon any place of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterwards appear: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death follows in many dispositions; And when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then draw it out and treat the wound.
And the signs of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and jumps the sutures that are on the brain, are headache and stupor and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is an issue from the nose or ears; and perhaps speech and voice are lost. and from the wound comes white moist substance resembling pus, and it also spurts like boiling flesh.
And if these signs appear, then tend to the wound, and remove the arrow if it is still there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer = The signs of the stone when it falls into the heart are that it is near the left nipple and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not hollow. et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz = and perhaps the stone moves like the finger, and there is black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent. = know then without doubt that death follows.
And the sign of an arrow that never leaves a foamy spittle from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes heavily and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; = And if the stone falls into the bladder cover, it is near the small ribs. et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; = and causes great pain and great sighing. And all the limbs from the shoulders move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by chance some undigested flesh may come out of the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and a little feces come out through the anus, there is no hope for the cure or the extraction of the arrow.
And if an arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and pelvis and hips and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man, an arrow fell on him in the armpit at the root of the nose: I pulled it out and drew it from the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without injury.
And shot with an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye under the membrane below, and the arrow was broken off, and he could not reach anything but the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large for a Turkish bow, all iron except for the light feathers.
The youth was healed, and no evil accident befell him.
And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian in shape.
I shaved off my beard, and acted so skillfully that I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
And I drew an arrow from a man who had it in his belly, and thought that he would die;
and after passing thirty days, his condition did not change at all. I cut around the arrow, and pulled it out, and drew it out strongly, and he had no evil accident.
And I saw a man upon whom an arrow fell in the back, and the wound was sutured shut;
And the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition at all, nor found harm in any of its natural works.
And I saw another man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and the wound was sealed; and remained thus without suffering great pain;
and many others like this.
And he drew an arrow from one of the king's leading men, which had fallen into his nose, and it was slightly slanted to the right side; and the arrow was completely bent.
I was called to tend to it after three days had passed since it fell. If I found the wound very narrow.
I recognized it as a subtle arrow and did not feel it at all; And he felt a prickling pain under his right ear.
I thought it was the tip of an arrow, so I applied a plaster that is astringent and healing to prevent swelling. And the place of the arrow appeared to me.
And the place of the arrow appeared to me. I put the plaster on for fewer days, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained thus for a long time until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose.
And he told me so. I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open, and then I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow which had settled in place.
then I approached the opening of the wound with that sharpened instrument until the head of the arrow became clearly visible to me.
and the wound healed well for three months, and then I opened it where I placed the forceps, and pulled from one side to the other, but it would not come out.
then I did not stop trying and devising ways to use tools until I grasped it with well-made forceps, as described at the end of this chapter, so that I could pull it out and close the wound.
And physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I then closed it and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you may focus your care on what I do not say, for the book cannot encompass everything;
but the wise master considers well a small thing, and that which is present and failing, finds new work, and nine instruments, for the resolution of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows should not be removed from the members into which they are fixed except according to two methods: either through the place where they entered, or through another part;
and the one which should come out by the way it entered is an arrow entering into fleshy places, and this should be done at times.
And if it does not heal now, then leave it until the flesh is rotten all around, and the exit is healed;
and so if it is lodged in the bone, and cannot come out, then leave it for some days, and move it each day;
and then it heals, and if it does not heal, then pierce all around with the finest awl, until the place around is enlarged, and then draw it out.
And if the arrowhead has returned to its place in the body and cannot be seen, then seek it along all the course. and if you feel it, then draw it out with some suitable instrument;
and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then widen it until the wound is large;
and draw out the arrow if you can, and if the arrow has barbs that catch, then remove as much flesh from around them as you can, and then break or bend the barbs of the arrow until you can draw it out.
And be careful not to break the arrow, for you would draw it out more harshly.
And if you cannot do it all at once, leave it until the place around is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier. And if the flow of blood goes against you, then use what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and devise a way how you can carefully draw out the arrow without danger, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
and put the patient in the same position he was in when the arrow struck him, for that is the greatest help there can be, and if you cannot do this, then place him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, or where something protrudes from it, or the skin is swollen in that spot so that one can clearly see or feel it:
Cut away until the tongs can grasp it, then pull. If it leaps now.
And if it is lodged in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, widen the bone, then draw it out.
And if it cannot emerge, then leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it emerges;
and if there is any shaft left, push out all the shaft;
and if the shaft falls out, and you see that a pushing tool is needed, then administer the pushing tool, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the groove of the tool;
and then push strongly, and if the arrow is grooved, then push in the pointed tool, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
And if the arrow falls into the chest or the stomach or the bladder or the side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut through, then cut.
And guard against cutting the vein and nerve, then extract it, then suture the wound if necessary. And tend to it until it is healed.
The shape of the pincers used to remove arrows is like a bird’s beak, and see here its form:
And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
The shape of the arrowhead is like the feather of a bird, to insert into the tip of an arrow, as here is the form:
There are 31 veins from which one can bleed, and there are 16 in the head, namely: Two that are behind the ears, which are called the "herb" veins. and the two arteries that appear in the temples;  /> and two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, which are called "aspirs"; And the vein which is within the forehead; And the vein which is at the top of the nose; And the two jugulars which are in the neck; And the two veins which are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "aujugularis"; And two veins which are below the tongue.
The veins that are commonly bled are five in each arm:
one is the cephalic and it is on the left side, and people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "fastus", and it is made up of the cephalic and the basilic veins, and people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the bladder is on the right side, and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the pubic bone, and it is that which is healed, which appears clearly on the vulva.
And the little vein is the one between the auricular and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the pubic bone on the left side, and the second is the saphenous vein at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "greater saphenous" which is in the other ankle;
and in the other leg there are three veins below these.
The bleeding of wounds after the ears helps against old fevers and migraines.
And the quality of the bleeder, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head and rub the place where the wounds are with a rough cloth. Then have the patient clench his neck with a rope, so that the two wounds appear behind the ears in two hanging places from the head. Then seek them out with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, sign there. 
Then take the lance and thrust it under the vein until the bone, then raise your hand to the top of the vein, cut through both skin and vein well twice across, and let out as much blood as you wish.
then hold and bind it until it is healed;
And I have already spoken of incisions and cauterization in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries located in the two temples is good for chronic migraine, gout, and habitual blindness; and for violent weeping of the eyes;
And the qualities of the bleeder are as I say: and it is that the patient should hold his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel with your thumb beneath your finger, and then press down on it.
then place your heart on the vein above your index finger, and insert the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then dislocate the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it. And then tie it tightly, and leave it until it is healed.
And we have spoken of them in the beginning of this book, concerning their tying and removal.
The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness.
And its quality is that the patient should twist his neck until the vein appears. then take the instrument called "fosseur," of which here is the shape:
And place the tip on the vein, and strike with your hand or another object, and allow blood to flow according to the amount you wish. Then untie the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healthy again; sometimes use a wide flame for the work.
Nevertheless, it should not be that the flame is too sharp; and the saw slantwise, because the bone is close by, and perhaps the flame breaks when it is subtle.
The sawing of the two veins that are in two temples is helpful for the eyes, and for ringworm, and for redness, and for the little vein in the eye, and for diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their sawing are such that the patient should twist his neck with some cord, as before;
Then heal it, and let the wound be from the crossbow, a little long and a little wide, for there is no flesh there. And if the flame is delicate, perhaps it will break.
Then make it bleed with blood, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
The wound of the vein of the nose is worth against fever, and madness, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old.
And the quality of the wound is that the patient stretches his neck, then presses his nose to your left hand, and takes the delicate, long flame, and places it in the space between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well there, and the blood will now begin to flow.
And do not go too deep, let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, for it is very quickly restored;
The fennel of two kinds also helps in the constriction of the nostril, and in the beginning of headaches, and in many illnesses, and in ringworm, and in corrosive sores, and in shingles;
and the quality of the fennel is that the patient should tighten their neck under both [fennels], as we have said;
and let the master be standing over the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat, then cut the vein of the arm widely for a short time, then draw blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligature, and gently compress all the veins so that the patient is not strangled; and leave it until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
de la saignée des veines The bloodletting of the veins of the lips above helps to cool the mouth, and to heal gum infections, and lip cracks, and of the nose and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting is to have the patient sit before you and compress their neck as I have said. then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is at the right lip and the other at the left, and they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins.
therefore cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
of bleeding under the tongue The bleeding of wounds that are under the tongue also helps after bleeding of the cervical [region], and this is for narrowing the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
and the quality of bleeding is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and he raises his tongue, and looks under on each side at a black wound.
bleed then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
The wounds of the knife with which one commonly bleeds are bled according to two methods:
either by pricking at the entire flame of a large myrtle leaf or an olive leaf that is thin and sharp like a cutting knife, and it is called "anesil". And they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the merlin flame is very renowned, and it is broad as you see.
And it is necessary for opening large veins full of large, visible blood, and which contain coarse and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive-flame.
And it is more subtle in its aim, and it is for healing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases under the throat, in the neck, in the chest, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the bleeder to bleed wisely, and to beware of the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and blood begins to flow, then he must staunch it, as I have said. And the flame should not be piercing, but cutting like a knife.
And if the blister does not open clearly, then you must press it and change another one; or where you want some veins of it, or you heal in its place the vein into the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with the knife like a blade, as we have said.
And if you want to find the vein, then first press on the arm so that you touch the spot until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot with ink, and then tie off the arm, and cut the vein with the knife like a blade. And beware that you do not strike an artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is of the artery. then avoid it.
And if you see it protruding like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from an artery. then hurry up, and place your finger on top for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens. if it is in an arm, leave it like this, and let the patient not move it;
and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the bleeding does not stop, and you are alone, and the physician is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, for the head of the blood will retreat. And bleed the wound.
And take a piece of fig bark, and split it, and take one of the halves and tie it on well until the next day;
if the wound is bled, that is good; if not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that bleed.
and bleeding is not good in many conditions due to the small area of the wound, and the power of the ligature around the arm.
The bleeding of the vein in the middle thus helps that it draws blood from above the head, and from below the body, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the physician to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deeply, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the wound becomes inflamed, and perhaps it cannot heal;
And this nerve often breaks open, and if it does not break open in some men because of its subtlety, then you must cauterize it with the silver instrument. And avoid the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, incise it lengthwise.
The vein of the head is useful because it draws blood from the head and helps with vision;
And it is necessary to cauterize with the olive or myrtle flame because this is the safest of all veins because there are no nerves or arteries beneath it. Indeed, one must look for the most suitable place, and if it fails the first time, do not worry, and try again. And perhaps the place swells in some men, when it fails the first time, but do not worry.
The quality of the bleeding depends on your judgment.
The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is practiced only to maintain health and to prevent future illnesses.
And let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are on the wrist. that is to say, the cephalic, fast, and basilic veins. And one should bleed at the beginning of spring for children, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear.
And one must cauterize on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
The cautery that is administered for illnesses has no fixed hour, but when the need arises during the day or night, at all hours and at all times;
And one should not cauterize children until they are fourteen years old, nor women who are pregnant from the fourth month until the seventh. The old who have passed LX years should not be treated.
And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, they must cleanse the intestines with a light enema if they have retained much feces, so that the veins do not draw the harmful excess from the intestines to the principal members.
And he does not heal at all who is too excessively fed with foods, or drunk, as long as he remains intoxicated, nor those suffering from dropsy.
And if he purges himself after suffering from colic, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and increased sexual activity with a woman, and from labor, vigilance, and fasting, and those who have completely lost their strength, either due to weapons or bodily injury.
Then refine the humors if the blood is thick, by foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
Then enter a bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and heal from the vein on the third day, as we have said.
And guard yourself that day from work, and pain, and lust, and similar things;
and be happy and joyful, and let the healers be higher than those who are being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then pull the ligament moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow;
and then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and can be felt;
then moisten the healer's hand with a little old oil, then place his left hand thumb over that vein below the spot where he wants to heal, so that the vein does not catch fire or break when pierced.
For there are veins that flow like ropes in a basket, and there are such that are full of windiness, so that when one brings up the flame, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with these. And if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for this reason it is necessary that the surgeon be wise in these things.
And if the vein opens on the first try, it is good; but if not, then again a little lower in that place or quickly above, if the spot is not swollen.
And if the spot is swollen and the patient is frightened, let him wait one or two days and do not bind the arm: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’ele li plait;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceo avient maintes foiz, quant li plaie est petite.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;
And thus administer the juice of oil into each wound that you open the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and the same acts as a triple drug and cures them when applied to the place. if it thins the blood and disperses when it is too thick.
And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not opened except at that time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place on the spot a sponge moistened in water and a little hot salt, and hold it for an hour;
and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if some blackness or greenness remains on the spot after several days, it does not harm. And if you see, apply some aloe or myrrh mixed with calamint juice, mustard, or something similar.
And often there occurs an abscess and swelling at the wound of the basilica:
Then place your hand on it, and if you find the area soft under pressure from the hand, then that swelling is bad. Therefore, do not apply anything of what we have said, for it may be coming from an artery.
Instead, make a dry poultice to harden the area, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And draw on each according to the amount of its virtue, and according to the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it bleed until it becomes red; And if you see it thick, leave it until it is thinned. And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it should be for the full and robust person who needs bloodletting, that one make a larger wound for him, and the flame should be wide.
And for the weak person, do the opposite, and one should bleed little and often, and one must bleed by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from bleeding too much and cutting a nerve, and it is worth more than the long or wide bleeding.
And for the one whose body fails at bleeding, it is necessary to give him soaked bread in pomegranate juice; If it is inflamed, draw blood three or four times; and if of a cold complexion, eat before the wound bread soaked in syrup mixed with mucilage, or honey-flavored syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if he faints from blood loss after a great deal of blood has been let out, then it is necessary that he drink broth made of meat and subtle, fragrant syrup, and use the other things we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to bleed from the arm and bleed again another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great blood loss, that he be bled little by little according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And if one wants to bleed from the arm after the first bloodletting and he has a strong body, then let him be bled seven hours after the first bloodletting, or after nine o'clock.
And who wishes to heal from another place, must heal on the second or third day.
For it has much blood inside the body which is already inflamed, and causes fever; so a large quantity must be drawn from it, and enlarge the opening until it reaches the bone marrow; then, when you have considered all the conditions of wound treatment, and place your hand over the patient's pulse while it is bleeding, so that death does not occur from bone marrow exposure, which happens often when the physician is careless;
And it is not necessary that when you see the arm dislocate, and make blood come out a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press very hard. Nor if it is crooked, that he extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
But let him be until he heals the second time; Or you prick with the tip of the flame until the frozen blood comes out of the vein's hole and put on a little silk soaked in water and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not compress it until the abscess is calmed down.
And if there is a need to bleed a second time, then heal it in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is healed in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
And the way of the healing is such that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the scar tissue turns red;
Then let it be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal now across, not wide or long.
And let the opening be wide, and let it be pricked well near the joint of the hand, and if pus does not come out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
And if it is summer, do not put the hand in hot water, for it is more needed in winter than in summer.
And the pricking of this wound is safer than any other wounds, for there are no veins or nerves therein.
The pricking of the little finger of the right hand is worth all the remedies for liver disease, and this is the method:
Press the hand, and put it in hot water until the wound swells up if you see it. And if you cut it diagonally, and you cut all of it through to the other side, then it is not harmful.
And do not go too deep into it, for the nerves are bare under all the skin, and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
And when you have drawn blood as much as needed, place oil and salt on the vein to seal it quickly, and do this for each time.
The bleeding from his left hand is as valuable as the illness of the mouse, and does everything similarly to what I have told you about the right side.
The bleeding from the saphena is as valuable as all the illnesses that are below the body, such as illnesses of the stomach, and retention of urine, and diseases of the kidneys, and of the thighs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of its bleeding is such that the patient should bathe his feet in hot water and rub on the wound until it opens, and then tie it over the foot joint. And the wound is at the ankle, and above the foot go many nerves;
Therefore, cut it then in the widest nerve, or at the ankle, because that is better.
And if you heal it on the foot, then beware of the nerves that are beneath, and heal from side to side like in cutting.
and let the flame be slow.
And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and allow the wound to drain well.
And if the healer fails the first time, then start again the second time a little higher, for the place is burnt.
and do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and so do with the sole of the other foot equally.
The place of the sciatic wound is at the ankle on the outside, and its cauterization is worth the pain of the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of his healing is such that the patient enters the bath, and pulls on the ankle four times while twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
and if it opens, then heal in all ways that you can, and by crossing over; And it is better for you to cut it off, because the place is empty, and it is very abundant in many men.
And it is better for you to cut it off, because the place is empty, and it is very abundant in many men. And if you cannot find it, then incise some of his flesh that opens onto the back of the foot, towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
and let the blood flow as much as you wish, then release the ligature, and apply cotton and bandage it; it is now healed.
Cupping glasses are made of horn, or tin, or glass;
and cupping is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this cupping, which is done without pricking, is done in two ways:  Or it is all fire, or without fire.
And scarification, which is done by cutting and extracting blood, is performed in fourteen places on the body, one of which is entirely at the top of the head. And another is in the neck; And two others on both sides of the neck; And the cupping beneath the chin. And the cupping at the shoulders; And the cupping on the hips; And the cuppings in both arms. And the cuppings of the two legs. And the cuppings of the two ankles.
And scarification does not draw blood except from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it weakens no one at all, unlike venesection. And it is not appropriate that it be administered, by any fire or without fire, in any illness caused by fullness, until the entire body is emptied.
And if it is necessary to bleed due to illness or habit, then we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, in the middle, and at all times;
for there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in the eyes;
and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; And there are some who dream of blood, wounds, death, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is mid-month, we order them to bleed after three hours of the day.
The bleeding of the nose helps with the lightheadedness of the head … that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this venesection is in place of the bleeding from the head, and it is not necessary that those who are of cold temperament use it, or have catarrh, because it does great harm to them;
and therefore the old should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
And those who bleed often become stupid, and therefore it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower out of fear of becoming stupid.
The venesection in the neck is in place of the bleeding from the head and the basilic vein, and for this reason it is good for constriction of the chest, and for fissure of the esophagus, and for coughing, and for fullness;
And there one should put a little, for if it holds too firmly, it injures the stomach and the heart.
The ventosations at the two ribs of the neck are good for the pains of the head, and for migraine, and for suffocation, and for the pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the incision of the basilica.
And you should instruct the surgeon to press with his hand while cutting, so that he does not cut the artery, and blood does not flow out continuously.
The ventosations under the chin are good for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth. And it is located at the junction of the two lips.
Ventosation on the shoulders is effective for illnesses caused by heat and fullness.
The cauterizations of the ribs are worth as much as those of three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins;
and instruct the physician not to strike too deeply into it, for the place is bare of flesh, and underneath are nerves and arteries.
The cupping on the rump is worth for hemorrhoids of the fundament and for diseases below, and it should be large and made of brass, so that it can draw well. and perhaps, if it were delicate, it would break. and it makes great wounds.
The cuppings on the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from all over the body, and they are worth for old pains of the reins, and of the womb, and of the bladder, and remove the humors.
And they are in the place of the two spleens and the two ankles; nevertheless, they weaken the body after long use, and bring on paralysis in many parts of the body.
The manner of placing the cupping glass is such that you first place it empty, and then suck immediately, and place it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood;
then fire, and replace the cupping glasses, and pay attention to the condition of the body, for there are those who have thick flesh and clear pores; thus it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one deep hollow. And suck gently.
And if the blood is thick, it must be struck twice: The first time to make the path of the thick blood finer.
And if the blood is very thick, it must be struck a third time;
And when we want to draw blood little by little, we only need to strike once. And if we want a lot of blood, then we must strike often;
And if the blood is thick, strike deeply, and the ends should be such that the heart is suddenly pierced, and for those who have thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, you must anoint the places of the cupping glasses with opening and dissolving oil: If it is inflamed, use oil of violets, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cucumber seed.
And if it is swollen, use oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or any similar one.
And if the excess is large and cold, then take bitter almond oil, or balm oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the one whom we heal has tender flesh and large pores, then no oil should be applied, but it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or mallow water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar waters.
And the one who has much moisture should be treated with easel, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluous growths should rise from old wine, or water of juice, or decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar ones.
And it is not necessary to use a cupping glass before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two.
And do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he washes, both when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et (and) warde (beware/take care) se (if) cil (that person) qui (who) se (himself) saine (heals) est (is) coleriques (irritable), et (and) se (if) li (the) sans (blood) est (is) trop (too much) agus (sharp/acrid) et (and) enflamez (inflamed). If it is necessary that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in vinegar, and similar things. And minced partridge, and lean meat, and moist foods.
And minced partridge, and lean meat, and moist foods. And if one has a cold constitution, let him take syrup of honey, and wine that is moderately fragrant, which is between old and new, and minced peacock, and minced partridge and small birds and thrushes.
And on the day he sweats, he must drink more than eat;
and it is necessary to give some men some tricat or muscat before sweating, or after, to strengthen the main members. and let the blood be thinned, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The cupping glasses that are placed without cutting are those placed on the liver, and on the bladder, and gout, and on the stomach and the navel and the kidneys and the hip, because these members do not tolerate being cut over the eyes, and it is only done to draw blood from member to member, as we place on the breasts when the baby sucks;
for to remove the stickiness that is on the limb, just as we place cupping glasses on the abdomen and on the buttocks to reduce the limb;
and removes pain, when there is a blister or stone, for perhaps by its attractive power it draws out the blister, or moves the stone from its place;
and thus it does when placed on the liver and on the bladder when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to draw out only as much. and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in cases of pleurisy, and in such manner that the cupping glass is filled with only hot water or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And let it have two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and let there be on the side around the middle a small hole, just like for inserting a needle, and let it be of bronze, soft at the front so that it does not hurt the patient when placing it on the limb;
and let there be in the middle a crossbar of bronze or iron, to place a bandage wrapped around it, both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who use them.
because the cupping devices for children are different from those for adults, and for thin people than for fat ones.
And one should place this cupping device on the limb in this way:
take a cloth of wax or linen, and place it inside the cupping device across the crossbar that is inside the cupping device, so that the heat source is at the bottom of the cupping device and does not burn the patient.
And then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be over the hole that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, the vapor goes out, and remove the cupping glass.
And apply the poultice again as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
In the cupping glass used for pleurisy, there is no rod or hole, and it is not applied until it is full of water, and is placed only on the limb.
And this is its form:
Leeches are not applied except in places where one cannot place a cupping glass due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar places. And in naked flesh, such as a finger or nose, and other similar areas.
And the quality of the cautery is that when you find blisters that are in clear, clean water without any impurity, take them.
And put them into a vat of clear water until they become familiar, and have nothing in their stomachs. And then have the veins and vessels bled with a cupping glass, then rub the member until it is red, and place the blisters upon it.
And when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where one can put a cupping glass, then put it there, for that is very effective afterwards.
If not, lift the place easily, and then with water, which is good, and then press it.
And if the healthy flesh swells too much after the leeches, then moisten the linen cloth in cold water and place it on until the leech is exhausted.
And if there are many leeches, then place ground vitriol or gallnut, and similar things on it until it is exhausted.
Or place half of the shelled beans on the spot and leave them until they dry out in place, it will exhaust now.
And if you need more, then take other leeches.
And if the leeches do not want to attach, then rub the spot with fresh blood or stick a needle in it until the blood comes out and then place the leeches on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will attach.
And when you see that they are falling out, then sprinkle a little aloe and celery on them, or ashes, and they will fall out now.
Here begins the book of fractures This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is for the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the foolish physicians of this chapter threw away all ancient books and read none of them;
And for this reason the science is strange in our land, because I never found any good ones.
And I know nothing about it except for the knowledge from ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have learned the skill, and by experience, and by the practice of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter what is contained in it, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Il is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise man puts his understanding, and remains on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quand brisure ou dislocation ou torsion ou fracture arrive à quelqu'un, il faut que tu te dépêches de soigner le patient d’une manière et d’une autre, si aucune chose ne t’en empêche entièrement, comme la faiblesse du corps, ou l'enfance, ou la vieillesse. ou si le temps n’est pas très chaud, ou trop froid ;
et ménagez des aliments froids, c'est-à-dire des soupes froides, et du fromage d'oiseau et de chèvre, et ne buvez pas de vin, et mangez aucune nourriture grasse, et ne vous remplissez pas trop de viandes qui remplissent les veines de sang, jusqu’à ce que vous n’ayez plus de doute sur la chaleur de l’abcès, ni sur l’expansion de la matière dans le membre.
If the patient returns to his original state of health.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that promote heavy nourishment and have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, heads, feet, calf's pancreas, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment, the bones heal better and more quickly.
And know that old and frail broken bones cannot be well repaired or fused according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor can those which are too soft, such as the bones of young children;
but do not worry, reset the broken bone with strong ligaments that hold and bind the limb together until it is as strong as before. and do not completely deprive him of his work, and for this reason he should be fed with rich foods, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes awry, and another in slanting, as the cut of a quill for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes awry, and another in slanting, as the cut of a quill for writing. And so there is a fracture with wound, and a fracture with all a small cleft.
And each type should have its own device and proper tool for restoration, according to what is remembered in its place.
And it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the place is twisted, and it becomes well apparent by feeling, and sounds when pressed with the hand.
And when there is no twist or sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
But it can well have a twist, or split, or small fracture. If you do not need to move it by hand, but apply medicines that come hereafter, and then hold it delicately now.
And know that the fractures that go awry, and are the two parts disjoined, it is now necessary to set them equally in place, lest abscesses come there.
And if hot abscesses come there, leave it alone for some days, until the abscesses are appeased.
then make it equal to the bone that you can easily and wisely adjust, and know that its restoration is more light than that of one where there are parts.
then hold it, as will be explained later.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, then hold it with two hands, if it is the foot or hand, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two cords, or with one cord and your hand.
and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, then adjust all the additions in their places to the bone as you can, and be careful not to cause the patient injury or pain through your work.
And adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best shapes.
And feel it well with your hand if you think that it is not right:
If it seems well to you, set it beautifully, and do not squeeze too much or press as those who cause hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
And when the limb is set, advise the patient well that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels any pain, it is not set right, and one must put it in such a position that he feels no pain;
and take care that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain. For when he feels any pain, it is not set right, and one must put it in such a position that he feels no pain; And take care that it is placed correctly, so that crookedness does not occur when it is reset.
And the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.
For there are small members, such as arms and fingers, and similar ones: so it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as hips and legs:
so it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bandage embraces the entire large limb and holds it equally on all sides, so that there is no gap.
then bind around light padding, three or four turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little all over the bandage, then go above the break and tighten less, so that the break moves away a little from the break.
And soften the ligament little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy area, then take the other ligament and turn it around again on the broken place.
Then return to the part below the fracture and fasten it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first ligature above.
Then place linen wads or cloths between the ligatures until they are all even, then tie everything together with a bandage on top, and then place your splints well on top, unless there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or abscess, place something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling on top, and leave it this way for some days.
then draw up thy hands on thine shoulders, and let them be of half the width of a thick rope, skillfully made, or of wood from which one makes cleavers, or of palm fronds, and let them be according to this figure
but it is necessary that the splint placed on the fracture should be a little larger and wider than the others
and let it also be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large then draw up the splints in the same manner as you did at the first time, then tie over it a thread evenly, as at the first time upon the fracture tighter is above, always less
and it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and let it be made of soft flax
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen done by fools who make their ligatures from twisted linen cord, and this is a great mistake, for the ligature cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not be that there is less than two finger widths of space between each knot.
And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the stars after being drawn into healthy places, place cotton or shredded wool under them so that they do not become bloody.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the heart is broken, I will describe the treatment below.
And know that it is not right to draw out all the broken members on the first day. for when the limb is large, it is not necessary to place ligatures stronger than after five days or seven, or more according to your surety of a hot abscess occurring;
and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torse;
and it is that you take the flour that adheres to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and place this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and apply it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring fracture in many conditions, especially for women and small children, for it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture, dislocation, and twist: Take three parts of barley and ladanum, helenium, asafetida, gum Arabic, and mastic; in total, twelve parts. Honey and aloe, five parts each. Garlic, nine parts each. And make it into powder, and mix with the white of an egg; if the man's constitution is warm, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, and it is valuable to many men.
Another manner of plaster that is good for twists: Take mastic and mallow, twelve parts each; iety myrrh and aloes, nine parts; ginger, six parts; mastic of Armenian bole, ten parts. Grind well and mix with plenty of egg white, then administer.
Another method for a plaster on dislocations and displaced bones, which relieves the resulting pain, and is used for bone fractures and breaks: Take new linen, soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the site.
This plaster does not restore [the joint/bone], but it is good for soothing hot abscesses and effectively relieves pain.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: Take dried fig leaves and wild peony leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method for plastering to restore bone fractures and to soften the remaining abscess. Take root of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, chickpea flour, of each one part.
and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, then mix with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another method of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of mallow, and linseed, mullein, melilot, ivy, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part. and grind, and mix with salt water or fresh water or wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its condition.
Ypocras says in his book that one should not put anything over a broken limb to restore force except for wax made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems that Galen says one should put over a broken limb, to restore it, dry and slightly warm things, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another method of plaster that is good for injuries and pain: Grind poppy seed and henbane, or bird feathers, and madder root, and celery equally, and pound them, and make a poultice and apply it.
And then dislocate the joint again afterward, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place. if it is not dislocated by hand. And if pain or itching comes to the place, without rest or swelling, then hasten and dislocate again, and remove the poultice now.
and take light cloth, and wet sponge of the sea, and dip it in water, and lift up the place, until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed. then let the member rest for an hour, then place on it a dry linen cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it onto a nut, until you are sure of a warm abscess.
and the inflammation of the member will rest, and the pain will be removed. Then begin again with a delicate bandage, and a little poultice, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and continue gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is swollen and red and painful and inflamed, I have removed it all, and you need a plaster and a bandage, begin again as you did first.
And if nothing happens to the member as we have said, do not untie it until after three days or four or five or seven. and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on what is seen, until the break heals, and the union of the flesh approaches;
then he will be constrained more than before, and his flesh will swell, as I have said earlier;
and if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that nutrition cannot reach there; then apply hot water poultice every time you release him, and this should be every third day, and loosen the ligature a little;
by this procedure, nourishment is restored to the limb, and it quickly heals as if done by foolish physicians who incorrectly reset the limb;
this is harmful, and such practices are fearful, and I see nothing in it but to let nature take its course and work properly.
Many types of fractures exist, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct;
because it has fractures that are caused by the impact of a sword, and the neck removes all the bone down to the marrow which is beneath the bone, just as an axe or log does. and for this reason this manner of fracture is called "axe-cut.
Or if the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing it, this manner of fracture is called "simple.
and the wound from these two fractures is either large or small.
And if there is a blunt impact, or splitting, or blow from a stone, or falling on a rock, or other similar things.
Et si il a fracture penetrante, qui atteint jusqu'à la toile qui est sous l'os, ou elle est sur l'os, et cette blessure peut être grande ou petite.
And there is a wound that is as fine in the bone as a hair, and the crack is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "hairline.
and if the wound is caused by being struck by a stone or by falling or something similar, and it causes the bone fragment to go downward, and the place is sunken in like how blacksmiths do when they hammer on cauldrons; If between the stones inside.
And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their heads, like a child's head;
and it occurs with all these types of fractures where small fragments are separated like stars; and I will speak about it in its place.
And let us recognize all kinds of fractures by the drawing out from them, and the inquiry with probes, and by the corrupt flesh that is on top.
The similarity to a hair is known because when one has uncovered the bone and rubs over it, a black fracture appears.
In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the patient's accidents, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, seizures, fainting, fever with chills, and eyes coming out strongly and reddening, and other similar things in many dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see a frightful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the wounded comes to you first, and this is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day that you can.
And if this is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh under the bone does not become corrupt, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the part to be split like this:
and it is that you should take the patient's head and uncover the bone in all ways possible, especially on the wound's shape as gently as possible. And if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone or if there is an abscess, then aid him with what is necessary. And it is that you fill the place with linen cloths moistened with rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is appeased, and you are sure of a stoppage of blood; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of working:
one way is that you cut with a narrow incision at the front, and this is the form:
And then there is another cut larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron;
and work lightly to avoid injuring the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must first bore around it before you administer cuts with scrapers, not so deep that they do not go through the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the point so that the point does not pass through the bone;
and you must have several of them, so that each one comes into its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you may have tests for all.
and there are three kinds of probes:
The quality for piercing around broken bone is that you place one probe on the bone and turn it with your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced.
then place the probe in another spot nearby and do this all around, then cut with incision tools the space of the bone that is between the holes, and do this more subtly and lightly than you can, as we have said, until you draw out the bone into your hand or with any instrument you have such as pincers. ︎
And beware that you do not touch the brain or the spleen.
And when you have pierced and removed the bone, it is necessary that you clean the remaining debris from the bone with another instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other chisels.
And if there is any remaining small bone fragments or scales, remove them lightly with an instrument; then treat the wound with linen and onions as we have said.
And another way of working is that which Galen says is safer; and he praises it greatly, and these are his words. It is first necessary that you expose a part of the bone where the break appears, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place under the head of this lancet-shaped scalpel, which has this form.
And do not cut from one side only, but the cut should be on both sides, so that the cutting instrument is towards the bone;
Then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is below.
If it is close to the bone, lightly remove it, for it can be removed well without harm, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the skin, and the bone is broken only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must smooth over that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper which you should have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
First use large scrapers, and then finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other hair-cutting incisions and delicate fracture, you should apply treatment according to its location;
And this is something that cannot be taught to one who has studied this art.
And if the ulcer is exposed, then you must take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound; Then take another cloth folded into two or three layers, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth. And do this more lightly than you can, so as not to weigh down the sponge. Then place another bandage on top and do not tighten it too much so that only the wound is compressed.
And leave it this way for a day or two until the abscess subsides. Then remove it and administer medicine such as lily roots, vetch flour, frankincense powder, and similar substances.
And from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer medicine that is soothing without any irritation.
And ensure that the wound is always clean, so that you do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow any pus to gather, because when pus gathers on the veil of the brain, it will run and spread, causing great harm to the patient;
For when you apply a stinging substance, it hardens from above. Pren warde donc, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness occurs due to the medicine applied, then take one part honey and three parts rose oil, make it into a plaster, and apply it on the stinging substance. Then continue with the manner of treatment until it is healed.
Know that sometimes both parts of the nose are broken, or one alone, for these are two bones;
And those beneath are cartilaginous, and they do not break, but only cause a swelling or twisting, and then heal.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert your little finger or probe through the nose, and bring the break even with your index finger, and outside at the thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach the place, then you must place a small amount of thick cloth at the tip of a reed.
And if the break is in two parts, do the same again, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then insert into the tip of the nose a piece of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Where you push one against another, if there is a fracture and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
And some say that one should moisten the tents with butter, and change them daily. It does not seem good to me, but they must be moistened in the preparation of an egg white and flour mixture. then leave the tent until the bones are healed, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes, feathers are put in the nose instead of tents, and there is a soft cloth around it, and if there is a fracture, the patient blows through it. Or do whatever you want.
And if such abscesses come to the nose while you work on it, put there a salve of cotton moistened in rose oil or in a little bag of diachylon.
And if an abscess does not form, then apply an external plaster made of flour of linseed and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place light bandages on top, and do not tie the nose.
And if the break of the nose is small, and it is broken into many pieces, extract it with suitable instruments, then sew up the fracture, and care for things affecting flesh, and healing, such as suitable plasters and ointments.
And if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and place leaden weights there until it heals.
When the jaw is dislocated downwards, and there is no wound on it, and it is only broken apart, and not broken in two, except for a small piece inside, then it is easily recognized.
It is necessary that if the break is on the right side, you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger, and gently push the break inside, and align it with your other hand from outside, and set it straight.
And if the jaw is broken in two parts, then you must provide traction in both parts until they are even.
And if there is movement of the teeth or loosening, bind them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw cataplasm, and put on a double cloth. And place on the cloth a well-made large strap, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above the mouth as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you see that the swelling changes, then release it on the third day, and then set right what has changed. And place a plaster on it, of the powder from the mill with plenty of egg or sesame flour, after you have removed the cataplasm.
And put on a light woollen poultice, and if the poultice dries out, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed. many times it heals in three weeks.
Et s'il vient des abscès semblables, alors agissez comme nous l'avons dit plusieurs fois.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, be careful that no piece of the bone has been removed; then remove it with instruments suitable for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and nothing remains, then sew the wound if it is wide, and place suitable plasters on it to promote healing until it heals completely.
The collarbone has been broken many times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three types:
or it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are parts, and this is the easiest to restore. ️
or there is a break with a wound. ️
And the work is thus when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the fracture feels strong. and the other extends the neck towards the part;
then place the break evenly between your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor displacement of it.
And if you need to extend more, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth or wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity; and stretch and lift the fracture, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you place the break evenly as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the bone out due to its depth, it is necessary that the patient lie on their back, and place under the shoulder a medium-sized pillow, and let the assistant push the shoulder down until the bone of the fracture is lifted.
And then bring the break to your fingers, and if you find it is displaced, it is necessary that you split open;
And draw forth the bones lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstacle, then strike it with one of the chisels you have. But place under the trestle this instrument, to prevent slipping.
And it resembles a spoon, and is not hollow, and should be as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
And it should have two heads, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the shape of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones.
And when you are sure of a hot abscess, then close the wound, and if the shape is small or you doubt a hot abscess, then fill the wound with lint and bandages according to its size.
And if abscesses come here, then soak the cloth in rose oil and in ashes and in wine, and apply it.
The compression of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fractures, is to place on the bone a plaster made of milled powder and egg white, and put light wool on top, and place a sphere under the saddle, if you need one. Then take a very wide bandage of about four fingers wide, then place a double cloth on top of the wool and the plaster; Then take a fine linen cloth of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down. And place the cloth over the break, and turn the bandage up over the healthy side, and under the saddle, and under the unhealthy side. And there you reset each part, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the star does not move on the broken bone, then you splint it daily, and when the ligament loosens, then you bind it again;
and make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under their head when they sleep to lift the shoulder upwards. thus the fracture will heal more easily due to the relief of the shoulder, where you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless a bad accident occurs, for up to twenty days.
then begin the plaster again, if you see that it is necessary, and bind and leave it thus until it heals.
And she is restored within twenty-eight days, and less so for some men.
About the breaking of the shoulder
It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks in a wide place or in the middle, and it is noticed only by touch;
so assemble it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
then place on the site powder of a mill with plenty of egg, and light dressings, and put on two cloths; then put on a broad and delicate bandage, a little wider than the shoulder, and if there are creases under the bandage in any part of the shoulder, fill those creases with linen dressings so that the bandage sits evenly;
And then he binds it tightly with a large bandage firmly, so that the bone does not move from its place, and checks the bandage each day;
And every time it loosens, he binds it again and sets the bone straight if it is out of place, and the patient lies on his side.
And the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
And when this number is complete, he unbinds it and be assured, for it is not the bone that easily goes out of place.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward and touches under the heart, it causes pain, extracts, and does what we have said in the case of breaking the rib to treat a hot abscess.
of the breaking of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; But it often breaks at the toe.
And when it is broken in the middle, it shifts downwards, and the patient feels great pain, weakness of breath, and convulsions, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passage in the broken bone, which can be felt well.
And the restoration is such that the patient often lies on his back, and he puts one pillow between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and aligns the ribs from the second rib down to your hands, and carefully ensures that it is set straight in all ways possible until the bone is properly aligned;
then place plasters and stuffing on top of a subtle layer of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and bind it onto the broken bone so that it does not move. and turn the bandage around to the back, and secure it firmly, and check every hour if the binding is still tight, and if it loosens, then tighten it;
and if it is necessary to unbind him, due to suppuration or itching that occurs at the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry and unbind him, and remove the plaster, and apply what has come of the methods of treatment.
then reset the plaster and bind it until he is healed.
of rib fractures
Know that rib fractures only occur in large places behind the back, and inside the head, and they break only because they are slippery. and one feels it well during the examination of two.
And the treatment is to set the fracture evenly, as is necessary. Then apply a plaster and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
And if the rib fracture is slanting inward, the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, as from a punctured lung, because the bone pierces the flesh. and breathes with difficulty, and coughs up large amounts of blood, which is a sign of serious illness, and the ancients have given it great thought.
And there are those who say that one should administer foods that inflate the belly to push out the fracture.
We do not do this, lest hot abscesses come there, if they have not already done so. And if they have come, then heal them.
And some say that one should put cupping glasses on the place to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt whether the cupping glass attracts excess humors to the place due to the weakness of the body.
And some say that one should cover the place with wool cloth dipped in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the bandage even all around, then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and with medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear due to a bone that punctures the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument below to prevent the pus from spreading.
And then one should cut the bone and gently pull it out, and then sew together the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals.
And if an abscess forms in this way, place wet cloths soaked in rose oil on the spot.
And treat the area as if for an abscess, and let it lie on the side where it should be until it heals.
and likewise to the spine of the back.
And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take note if you see their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Know that he is mortal in many situations, and if he moves them and feels well when they are strained or pricked, know that the articulation of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one applies a remedy there.
And if something similar happens to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is whole or not, then take heed if the feet are paralyzed, and if there are injuries in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation;
and when one turns it over on its stomach, there is involuntary evacuation. And when he is placed on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is fatal; unless you labor very diligently in his care.
And if these accidents do not happen to him, then the case is more mild.
And the treatment is that you investigate if there is a hot abscess, then put on the spine oil of rose or oil of yolk of egg, until it is soothed;
Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and secure it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
And if any bone breaks out, then it must be covered with wax; and remove the bone, then join together the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large, and treat it with a healing salve until he is healed.
And if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "bone head", then press your little finger of your left hand into it and make it even with the other hand to your power, then apply the poultice and bandage on top, if you need it.
Then hold it [still], and if there is a shard of bone, remove it and heal the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It sometimes happens that the hip bone breaks, and if it does, it is usually only a small loss at the top. And it stretches along its length, and slants towards the outside, causing pain and soreness in that spot, and swelling like a bruise.
The treatment is to extend your hand over it until you are above the break; and know what kind of break and shape it has;
And if the break is only at the top, then set [the bone] evenly so that it is in its natural shape.
And if the break is lengthwise, or it declines inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach, so that you may be prepared to restore that break. And when you have set it evenly, place the poultice on it, then put a wooden or poplar splint over it, and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move.
And bind it under the ribs, so that the ligature is even. Instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and then put on what we have said before. And then return to setting it, and hold it as needed if there is no bad outcome.
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder is what is between the armpit and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be set according to one of the two methods.
whose one is that you take a stake of moderate thickness, according to this form:
And tie two stakes with two straps, and lift them up, and make the patient sit on a seat;
then you throw his broken arm onto the stake, until it reaches the armpit, and has in the middle a curve of the stake, then pull up some heavy object where the assistant stretches downward;
then have the helper hold the fracture level with his hands together, so that the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is to have the patient lie on his back, and tie his hand to his neck; then command two attendants, one to hold what is above the break at their hands, and the other to hold below all the length, and each extend to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold firmly the ligament below the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the instruments to its part.
And if the fracture is near the shoulder's head, then you must place one strap midway under the armpit, and another towards the side, under the fracture;
And thus if the fracture is towards the bone, then a ligature should be placed lightly, without effort, until the fracture is equal on both sides and on the bone.
Then set the fracture as it should be and bind it tightly, if any abscesses occur there.
And if such abscesses occur, do not bind it for seven days, and place moist linen on top with rose oil until the abscesses subside.
Then bind it, and the manner of binding is that you place a poultice on the fracture, then raise the arm to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or chest.
And put the bandage, and hold it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in the position of the stars, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use stars, and place on the break a larger and stronger star than the others, and let there be two fingers' width between each star, and each star should be so large that it passes the break by three fingers on each side.
Then hold on the stars as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the break, more tightly and less widely spaced.
And if you see the base of the stars and the tightening as we have said in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said.
Then look at the bandage every three days, to prevent itching or swelling from occurring in that place, as this can hinder healing due to excessive tightness. If you receive it, as we have said.
And if no such incidents occur, do not remove it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach;
and place a cushion full of wool equally under the bandage, and every hour of the day or night check that the shape of the broken limb does not change, or that the bandage is not loosened;
if it heals through the power of medicine, and give him the food that we mentioned before, in such a way that the food is first finely ground; And when he begins to recover, he will be thick.
And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be reset within forty days of everything. Then one must free him and administer baths and medications with onions to direct the area.
And if the constriction is ugly and swollen, it takes one day or two months to heal.
of the arm break
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two phalanges," one of which is small and follows the wrist.
And the other is large, and it is the one that is below, near the little finger.
It may happen that only the large phalanx breaks, or the small one, and it may also happen that both break together.
When the small phalanx is broken, the setting and healing are easy;
And when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more serious than if they are both broken together.
If it is only the small scapula that is broken, then it should be stretched slightly and made straight.
And if it is the large one that fractures, then it needs to be set more strongly;
And extend it on a cushion, and hold the little finger of the hand higher than the others, and the small toe lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him, higher so that the patient does not suffer any hardship.
Then let the ministers extend their arms to the part below his hand or to the limb, and another minister to the other above.
And then the physician will set him straight, according to his best ability.
And if there is a break with pieces, place each one in its proper place; and if any of them sticks out and touches the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, cut above and remove it, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a separate chapter; Si pren la cure.
Si pren la cure. Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; Si pren la cure. Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.
Si pren la cure. Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;
And know that it must have six stars or arms in various positions: whether the break is in one of the bones or in two;
and holds more firmly on the fracture than elsewhere, and always less by lengthening, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
and let the cloths that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread used for binding be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
And wrap the limb and the ligament after some days. And if any bad event occurs to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must rinse the limb with hot water until that itching is calmed.
And let the member not rest too tightly.
And then resume the binding, and if the ligament is weakened and the bone dislocated, or similar things, treat it accordingly.
And if you notice that nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it with a poultice and leave it like this for some days, until the nourishment reaches it, and then bind it.
And if none of these things we have said happens to the patient, then do not unbind them for up to twenty days.
or in which case, he should put his hands on his neck, and let his neck be equal, and take care of movement and jerking, and sleep on his back;
And know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the nature and constitution of the powers.
of the break in the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and between the fingers there are few breaks, and only swelling occurs many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, then the patient should sit cross-legged, and sit upright in front of him evenly;
then place his hand on the spread cloth, and let the caregiver straighten the broken bones, and let the surgeon align them well until they are joined properly.
And place the poultice and the wool, if an abscess does not form, then put a needle according to the size of the wound. And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
And if the break is around the waist near the belly of the foot, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken foot. And then bind it with a long cloth, and let the needle be as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it as needed.
And if the fracture is in the finger, you must place a bandage on top and another underneath the limb, so that the hand remains open and straight; then bind the whole hand, and secure the ligament between the two.
And if the break is in one of the toes, if it is protruding, set it straight, as needed. And hold it with the sole of the foot, and if you see thus, place a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move.
And if the fracture is in the other finger, such as in the index or one of the others, place it equally, and tie it with the healthy finger that follows. Or you bind all together in one bandage, which is better, or you place a splint on top, like in a pocket.
And take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and heal that which comes from it, as I have said.
The thigh bone is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward;
And the restoration is as follows: one ligature on top of the fracture, and another beneath. And the patient lies on his back, then each assistant extends their ligature equally to their side;
and this is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the break is near the root of the thigh, let one of the ligaments be towards the knee, and the other ligament below the break.
And similarly if it is near the knee, then the ligature should be at the knee, and the extension downward.
Then the surgeon should put the bone back in its natural shape with his two hands, and then apply the poultice, and bind it, if pus does not come out.
And if there is hot pus, leave it to drain first, then return to your work and treatment. The incision is made in such a manner.
It is necessary that you wrap around the break II or III layers of thick bandages, leaving some excess, then turn the leg until the heel reaches the base of the big toe, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, near the knee below, and the ends of the thread should come out on top.
then turn the bandage around the leg and the thigh, then place splints on the break, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to make the bandage even, then begin to tightly bind III or IV turns around the break. And when more goes above the break, and less it holds;
then place two fingers of the thread that you have passed between the leg and the thigh, and in it place three needles that are above, then go back below to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot.
and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, since there comes neither abscess nor swelling nor anything similar. And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address whatever comes, as we have said many times;
and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then you must remove them, if possible. and if it is not possible, then one must split the place, and pull strongly; and treat as we have said, until he is healed.
And sometimes the thigh is broken like one puts needles in it, as in the shoulder and in the arm;
nevertheless, in such a restoration the patient does not limp.
And know that the hip is restored within 40 days or a little less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, but it bends many times.
And if it breaks, it is only a split or a hole, and this happens with any wound, and without a wound, and everyone feels this.
And the restoration is like one places equal to what is round on its two sides, so that it may be assembled together as one can.
then apply the plaster, and place a round needle in it if you need to, and hold it as necessary, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as treating an abscess and similar. apply to each incident what is needed for it, until it is healed.
Of the leg fracture
You should know that in the leg there are two bones. One is called by its right name "muscle," and the other is called "fibula.
And there is the same kind of fracture as in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and all the operations are the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns on all sides.
And if the smaller bone is broken, it turns to the front.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well. and turns downward.
Then apply traction, and set it evenly, and bind the splints evenly;
however, if the fracture is ugly and there are several fragments, then the traction should be gentler and lighter; And align according to your power.
And when you have completed your work, take two splints of wood that fit the leg from one side to the other, and let them be as long as the leg from the knee downwards.
Then wrap two of them with a bandage on top and bottom, and bind it in the middle as well. At this point, the leg will not be able to bend to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
And some add a splint the length of the leg, and it is made of wood. They place the leg inside to prevent movement. This is done properly in the case of a fracture where there is a wound.
And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; and cure it until it is healed.
Of the breaking of the bones of the foot
At the ankle, there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot break and the two feet, and only fragments are found in many cases.
And if there is a break in the foot bones, and you see these bones surpassing each other, then put this patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and now put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
then put a poultice and bandages on top, and place beneath the foot a small board with two full nails, then fasten it firmly to the foot, after which you will wrap cloths around, and other things that you need.
Et lorsque trois jours ou quatre seront passés, alors délie le ligament, car tu trouveras les os égaux, qu'ils soient cassés ou disloqués.
And if there are any of the fingers broken, set them, as we have said for the fingers of the hand. Then place a splint on the broken finger according to its length, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot the table that I have mentioned, and bind it securely.
And if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, place on each finger a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the table under the foot. And let it be standing at the head of the table, outside the foot's belly, so that it holds well.
And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said before; And treat each incident as necessary.
of the bone of the wrist
When the bone of a woman's natural structure is broken, have her sit with legs spread, then lean her towards the back, and let her be held from behind;
then fill the woman's natural cavity with cotton, and place therein as much as a fistful.
then have the woman stand up, and lift her back bit by bit, and thus the cotton will jump, until it comes to the entrance of the vagina, and the bone will return with the fist.
And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and after she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or thereabouts. Then the fracture will be healed, and if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tie a string to its neck, and insert the entire bladder into the vagina; Then breathe strongly into the reed until the bladder is inflated inside. the fracture will heal on its own;
then fill it with cotton and leave it thus for some days until it is healed.
And when the bone of a man's hand or a woman's is broken, restore it as we have said for the hipbone;
and these nearby fractures are not hidden from those who apply themselves and their skill, and understand my book.
For the fracture indicates in several dispositions the correct way of restoration: understand it then.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert the penis into it; Then wrap it with cloths around, and leave it for three days wrapped around, and it will heal quickly.
with break and wound
It is necessary for one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the thigh bone or the shoulder bone or similar, that he be cauterized now, so that the cauteries we have spoken of testify to this.
And if the wound heals, then close it with vitriol, if you do not have anything else, then begin again to restore the breakage in that same hour, or that day, if abscesses like these do not come there.
And if abscesses like these come there, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause evil to happen there.
And if the broken bone is protruding from the flesh exposed, then it is necessary that you place it lightly with your hands, with a slight extension.
And if the extension is not ready to be applied equally to your hands, then reset it with this iron instrument that has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the size of the wound. And for this reason it is necessary for the physician to take three or four [of these], according to what he needs in each fracture cure.
And it should be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend at all when pressed upon the limb during your work, and it should be pointed in front, and thicker from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called "palanche," because the curved head must be placed above the exposed end of the bone. and strikes once, so that it returns and both ends are equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the end of the bone until the instrument can hold it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then cut with an appropriate instrument, either a scalpel or scissors, according to your ability;
then remove that which remains in the bone of roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Do this until it is in its place, then moisten a cloth in black stiptic wine, and cleanly if it is in summer;  /> ici le couvres d’un drapeil, et puis de laine, et puis de bande, et puis de laigature de fil. And do not put any ointment or other oil-based substance on the wound, lest it cause decay and corruption.
Then apply bandages after you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not strained with the fracture;
And often the foolish physicians do this, and cause the patient to die or be consumed by decay. And let the strain be gentler and softer than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then do not put bandages on it. but wrap around it, in place of needles, hard rags, and tie them.
And when you see after one day or two enlarging the wound in the place, then remove everything you have put on at once, and apply a healing salve to the wounds, such as tetrapharmakon salve and similar ones.
And you should unbind the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and healthy.
And the limb should be prepared in such a way that the wound drains easily downwards.
And if many days pass and it cannot heal but rather breaks open again, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so you must probe the wound with a tent, and remove all the loose pieces that cause this pain.
And if an abscess or other form of corruption occurs there, you must cure it according to what is said in the previous chapter.
And when the bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the thigh or shoulder bones and other similar large members, do not extract it, for many times death results; but leave it until it rots.
perhaps it will fall out after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can.
and if you cannot, leave it be.
We often see health return after the fracture, especially when it is near the joint. It is a ugly sight to behold the shape of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Take care, therefore, if the nose is fresh: if you administer styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, take one of these things or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or plenty of egg or honey; and place them on the nose in cloths, bind it well, and do not release it for many days;
and place them on the nose in cloths, bind it well, and do not release it for many days; and then remove it, and begin another, until the swelling is gone;
or bind it on a well-made piece of lead; for the property of lead is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
And if the swelling has already turned to hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut off the top of it, and make the excess apparent. or cut it with some scissors until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
Of the limb which is weak after the cure
When the fracture of the bone is healed, and afterwards the limb remains weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons: because one reason is that it was bound too tightly and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or for excessive application of ointments; Or for too great a movement, not at all in its hour; Or because he has little blood in his body, he is weak.
And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and make the body tender, until the blood is abundant in him. and give him a bath, and bring him joy and cheerfulness;
then place pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws great nourishment to it, and irrigate it often with warm water, until the nourishment flows into the limb. and it returns to its natural shape.
of a twisted limb after health When the limb is twisted after the treatment, and the broken bone is exposed, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function.
if not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb completely, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
and these works are blamed, and great evils come from it, and perhaps death;
nevertheless, if the dislocations and tortures are recent, they must be softened with hot water, or cooked with softening herbs, such as mallow leaves, roots, mullein, and similar things;
and make a softening plaster, like well-made diachylon, and take the marrow of mallow, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and apply the plaster on top; ・
You take fat figs, and grind them with colocynth juice, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
And sometimes dislocation is removed by continuously and extensively rubbing with wet hands. And the member should be gently moved every hour.
And if the swelling is hardened like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut down to the bone with a sharp, light incision. And put cautery and poultice on the wound.
Dislocation occurs when a joint is displaced from its place, so it cannot move, and the limb is deformed, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation happens to someone, they must immediately be brought back to their senses.
For if one delays, the place swells, and perhaps it is only barely reset in place.
Therefore, one should not move it at the time when it is swollen. often causes spasm and other pains.
nevertheless, when this happens, have the patient bled, then leave it alone until the abscess has subsided.
Then soak the limb in hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each limb as it comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head down to the feet.
It sometimes happens that the jaws are dislocated together, and the dislocation of both is according to two ways: or they are a little removed from their places, and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the chest, and the saliva runs from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through many positions.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must quickly reset it, and do not delay at all;
And in such a manner that the assistant should hold the patient's head, and the practitioner should insert one of his fingers into the pocket of the mouth at the root of the mandible's dislocation, if the dislocation is of two parts. And let the other two fingers be outside, to balance.
And instruct the patient to relax his jaw and move it in all directions. And the healer balances it until it returns to its place.
And if the joints are stiff, whether it be both jaws together, then soak them in hot water and oil until they loosen slightly.
But do not force the joint, as we have said.
And when they are equally realigned and the patient's mouth closes well without loosening, then place moistened bandages on a poultice made of rose oil and wax, and bind it lightly with soft bandages.
and let the patient sleep on their back, with their head resting between two pillows, so that it is not moved to the right or to the left, nor should they try to open their mouth, but let them eat light food, until the pain subsides, and the jaws are sewn shut;
and then let him chew lightly what he wants, without trying to open his mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well sewn and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be set correctly within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then fever and sudden faintness follow, and perhaps diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
And when you see that, know that it is a dangerous situation; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
The jaw cannot dislocate from the inside or from the end of it, and sometimes it is dislocated downwards, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies frequently on their back, with their arms extended; And then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return.
Then apply the poultice and bandage, and bind it tightly.
And the head that is towards the knife cannot dislocate; If not, and if it dislocates even once, reset it to its place, as we have said.
Then apply the poultice and bind it tightly with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest until healed.
And in the same way is the shoulder joint reset when it has dislocated from its place.
Of the shoulder dislocation
Know that the shoulder is only dislocated in three ways:
One of which is that it dislocates towards the lower part of the armpit; xspace And the second is at the part of the foot; And perhaps it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves.
And many times it dislocates downwards towards the ankle, especially in those who have little flesh, for to them it jumps quickly.
In those who have enough flesh, it hardly jumps and hardly returns.
And it happens to some men through a blow or break, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must test it until you are certain of it. And then begin the treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it is downwards towards the ankle, and make a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a clear difference; And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and under the armpit at the top of the shoulder, as if it were an egg. And the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor make any movement;
And also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly under the armpit.
And this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the way to do it is for the attendant to lift the patient's hand up, then place your fingers under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upward to its place. And the minister raises his hand, stretches it upward, then places it below. It will come quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said in fewer days afterward, then the patient must be bathed in hot water. And the assistant should gently soften and soothe, as with a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and mallow in water, and it should be administered.
Then let the patient be made to lie on his back, and under the cushion place a cloth of wool, not too soft nor too hard. Then let the healer place his heel upon the cloth, and lift the chief of the sound shoulder vigorously, and pull the hand of the patient.
And another minister shall dye the patient's head, so that it does not move downward; that shoulder returns immediately, and if you see this, then reset it in this manner:
And it is necessary for you to have a man who is taller than the patient be present. And he should stand straight by the patient's side, and push his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit up, so that the patient hangs in the air; And another minister shall pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then put with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Or one can also reset it in this other manner:
And that is to fix a long piece of wood into the ground, so that its head be as round as a pestle, and neither too thick nor too thin; Then let it be placed under the patient, but that he has soft cloths above him, and the patient should be standing along the length of the beam.
Then let his hand be stretched downward on the other side strongly, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment: Take a brand of two spans long and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded to enter deeply under the heel, according to this form:
Then place soft cloths on top of the head of the beam, so that the beam does not hurt the patient, then put it under the heel of the patient.
And stretch his arm along the length of the beam, and place the shoulder on the beam, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on one step of a ladder, and let the body hang downward on the other side. The joint swells now.
And when it is inside, in whatever manner, you must place under the bottom a round piece of wool, then apply the plaster prepared with flour from the mill, with incense and egg white, over all the shoulder and around it, then tie it firmly under the bottom, and twist the ligature over the plaster, and embrace the hand to his neck, and let the hand remain so.
And it is necessary that he eats little, until the member is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
and then eats more after 5 or 7 days, and moves it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
And if the joint is moved out of place due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three cauteries to it, as it is said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the foot and ankles, or from behind, is done by pushing and stretching of hands, and another method is used there.
And heal until he is cured.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.
De la dislocation du coude
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and at points returns;
And if it has dislocated from all sides, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reduced, because one sees and feels it well; And it dislocates according to each shape. And when you join the sick member with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is dislocated, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it before any abscess develops there, because if an abscess were to form, it would be difficult to reset.
and perhaps it cannot be completely reset, especially when it is at the back; It is worse than other dislocations, and it causes more pain, and perhaps death may follow.
And the restoration is such that when it is possible to bring it back, you stretch his hand with your two hands; and his arms are spread, and the hands of the mirror according to the cut around, above and below, and push the joint together at its fingers or at the base of his palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strike with the root of the palm where it is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, then apply strong extension;
and two assistants extend the arm, and hold it in place with two hands so that it does not move during extension.
then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth;
and when the mirror has rejoined the joint to his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint strongly until it returns.
And when it is in place, apply a dry dressing with some egg white, hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the patient's neck, leaving it for a few days before releasing it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage and leave it;
And if you see that the joint does not hold well, then renew the dressing and the bandage, leaving it for some days until it is firmly set. Then untie it.
And if the patient feels pain after the joint is reset and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, pressing until the pain subsides. Or place a greasy sheepskin over the joint, leaving it for one day and one night, then remove it and have him enter the bath. And when he sweats, wipe the joint quickly, then put the ice back on, and then enter the bath. And do this two or three times until it is healed.
And if you see [pus], put moist, heated cow dung with butter on it, and keep it covered.
It will return to its proper position.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the relocation is lighter than other joints. However, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the very hour that it is dislocated, before the place swells or a hot abscess forms. ¨
And the resetting is done by placing the injured hand on a table, and having the assistant extend the hand, and the physician places his hand equally, so that he places his palm over the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Yet, you must check if it is properly in place; Then have the patient put the back of his hand on a table during extension and flexion. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and the physician should place their hand on that appearance of the joint.
If it returns now, it is good. If not, apply soothing poultices to the affected area, and leave it thus without reattempting.
And if he cannot tolerate it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, the joint will remain dislocated.
And it does not harm the patient in any way except that while the hand is wet, he cannot grasp anything at all. Then know that the nerves or vessels are cut.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.
And when the hand is in place, apply the poultice we have mentioned, then restrain it and leave for V days, then release it and let it be thus.
And if he cannot move it well and there is some stiffness, soak it in hot water and rub until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist.
Then stretch out the fingers and push the dislocation back towards you until it returns, then support the base of the finger and bend it towards the side where it is dislocated.
And let it be for two days, and then make it equal on the third day.
And apply a bandage as we have said, and unbind it by day, and make it move, and reapply the bandage at night.
And do this frequently until it is healed, and do the same if it is dislocated in the wrist of the hand, and act as you did before, until it is healed.
And do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
When the shoulder blade or neck is dislocated, and there are multiple dislocations, then there is no cure, for death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the excretion comes out without will or control, and many times some members are softened, such as the two thighs or the two arms or one.
And often the spine moves in four parts;
that which moves to the back is called "gibbousness":
The treatment for this is that you should reverse it if the gibbousness has come from childhood: If not, there will be no cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from a fall or blows or similar things, the ancients used to describe the methods of healing in great words, where there is not always much benefit;
But I have summarized it according to my intention, and I have created instruments in various ways.
I say that in the jaundice which comes to the chest beforehand, neither intelligence nor health has it;
And likewise that which comes directly into the two ribs, and one cannot cure except for that which specifically comes to the back, as I say.
And it is that the patient should be lying on his back in one equal place, and have restraints under him, so that he does not injure himself.
Then drive a log into the ground at the head strongly, and another at the feet, and tie one cord beneath the patient's shoulders, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
And two assistants know the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two logs.
And let them be well tied, the logs as we have said, and the surgeon places his palms firmly on the spine until it heals.
And if it does not heal with this treatment, then take a table three fathoms long, and place it under the bed, and let the patient lie on his side, and push the end of the table under the bed, then place the middle of the table on the spine. And let the surgeon place his feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
And if you see it, do the same for the vertebra that turns towards the hand. And it is that you place two faggots at the head of the patient, one arm's length long, and towards the feet, two others, and there should be between each faggot, above and below, a hand's breadth in length.
And let there be one hole in each faggot, where the rope passes through, and let the faggots be firmly planted in the ground, so that they do not move.
And between each two faggots there should be one turning faggot, on which the rope turns, and in the two turnings there should be two small faggots of a hand's breadth in length, to turn the rope.
And then tie the rope that is among the horses to the rope towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other rope, and each of the helpers turns his rope all the length of the rope, and the master places the spine equally as we have said.
And when it is healed, place a desiccating plaster with an abundance of egg, then the wool, and then the bandage of a tablet of three fingers in length, which should cover the place of the yellowish color and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a thread, as we have said, and the patient should use subtle nourishment until he is cured.
And if anything comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the bandage that we have mentioned before. And sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the lower spine of the back, and it is thought that this is dislocation. And this is the bone that opens, which is why one should not have presumption about it. perhaps it would bring death.
Know that in the joints of the hip and in the joints of the shoulder, only dislocation occurs, and not as in other joints;
And the hip joint is dislocated in four parts. within and without, and before and behind
and more within than elsewhere, and rarely dislocated in front or back.
And the sign of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the patient's knee opens more than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his knee as much. And it is the place which is near an abscess that is hot, because the head of the thigh comes there.
And the sign of those to whom it happens as a result is that this event is contrary to the previous ones.
And the sign of the one to whom it happens in front, is that he stretches his leg according to the accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot go forward, and holds his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he walks, he steps on the heel.
And the sign of those to whom it happens afterwards is that they cannot extend their knee or bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in the place below the hips.
The remedy for this kind of dislocation is that you return it if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its condition, then there is no treatment; ‌ and he should not have any presumption about it.
And in that which is the recent dislocation, and this is of the four types of dislocation, so hasten that you turn the joint, and push it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return [to its original place], and no other treatment is necessary.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong support, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or one strap that is tied above the knee; and another assistant should extend his hand on top in such a manner that he places his hands underneath the soles, then pulls with a soft strap around the thigh; and another holds the end of the strap;
and they extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is well.
If not, then one must apply care to its likeness.
When the dislocation is in the hip, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the ligament on the root of the thigh, and the place that is below the ankle, then extend the ligament upwards towards the ankle and towards the shin.
Then take other assistants his arms, and embrace the thick part of the sick thigh, and extend it strongly with force. then it will return to its place now.
And this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot set it in the manner we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, soft ligature above the two ankles, and above the two knees, and let the diseased leg be stretched two fingers' width more than the other.
then let them hang from a pole over the head, and let them be about two arms' length above the ground.
then command one attendant to grasp the thigh above the joint, and let another attendant hang with the patient, who grasps the thigh firmly, for the joint will now return quickly.
And when the dislocation is over, let the patient lie down as we have said for one who has paralysis, and tighten the ligature properly around the diseased leg, and also around the foot.
Then put two tapers, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert a taper between the thighs of the patient in this manner; And let it be surrounded by moistened cloths so that the patient is not burned, then let each assistant approach him, and the doctor align the dislocation with his hand.
If it returns, that is good.
If not, lay him on the table and press as we have said in the dislocation, and let the patient lie on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is forward, then it is necessary to straighten the injured leg quickly, as I have said. And let the doctor place his weight on the injured ankle, then press with the other hand and straighten down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is backward, then it should not be straightened downward or lifted from the ground, but rather the patient should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said about lying on two hips. And let it be on its face, and the ligaments extended as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table. And it will be ready when the patient extends his legs, and they are equal. Then join the thighs, and place a poultice, and restrain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move. And rest for three days or four, then dislocate it again, and place the poultice on top.
And if you see that they are equal, then restrain as before, and leave for three days.
Then dislocate it again, and have the patient walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
Of knee dislocation
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inward, outward, and backward.
and does not dislocate forward.
And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not bend at the thigh, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all (three types) is that you make the patient sit upright and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet.
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee strongly. And another assistant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he can bend his leg at the thigh easily. xspace
And place the plaster on it, and bind the leg to the thigh, and keep them together strongly for three days or four, then unbind it.
And let the patient not try to walk until the limb is healed.
And if the limb is not perfectly straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the ankle dislocation
The ankles are sometimes moved and sometimes fully dislocated, inside and out.
And the sign is that the ankle is swollen and protrudes towards the dislocated part.
The reduction should be gentle, and it should be stretched gently with his hands when only slightly moved.
And when it is completely dislocated, you must have the patient sit upright, and have one helper hold on to the leg above the ankle.
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then stretch it upwards, and push the foot upwards nicely.
And do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot.
if it returns, that is good;
but if not, then begin the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around it, so that it does not wound the patient.
then let one of the assistants hold the thigh, and another assistant extend the foot with his hands or with a strap that he ties above the ankle. then let each assistant extend equally, and the stake should always be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when stretching.
Then let the doctor reset the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is well set, then place the bandage and cloths on top, and bind tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch out for the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ligature is not too tight;
then leave it for two or three days, and if the bandage loosens, bind again;
then unbind on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if a boil comes here, you must soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
two When the fingers are dislocated, they must be gently stretched without strain, and this is a light task.
Et si la dislocation est dans une articulation du dos ou du pied, il faut que tu fasses asseoir le malade sur une surface plane ou sur une table droite, et mets ton pied sur ce qui dépasse de ces articulations, puis presse fortement avec ton pied jusqu'à ce qu'il revienne à sa place.
Et quand il est de nouveau aligné et que rien ne dépasse, alors place sous la plante du pied une planche avec deux chevilles. Ensuite, serre fortement et laisse reposer pendant trois jours, puis desserre. Et fais-le reposer jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Of wound and dislocation together
Lorsqu'une blessure accompagne la dislocation et que l'on veut la réparer, il arrive souvent que le patient meurt.
If you are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, do not be presumptuous in the cure; and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and patient, do not be bold;
Use at first things that calm a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope for health; And when you see hope, then reset the limb in place immediately, before the hot abscess comes.
And when the limb is in place, administer things that calm a hot abscess, and treat the wound as needed with dried onions.
And if there is also a fracture with the dislocation and small bones are displaced, remove them and do as we have said for simple diseases.
And beware of entering into a state of fear, as I have said, for it is worthless according to your Creator, and for the skill of your weapon and your body.
