O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything everywhere, thus the knowledge is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the powers except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the knowledge is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I want to bring to life together the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring together the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and other equipment of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it behoves him who undertakes to learn the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of the bones, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and resting of the veins moving and resting, and the issue of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much, and with the work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned beforehand, should beware so he does not fall into error and does not harm men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Thus I have seen many of those who engage in this science, and then abandon it without knowledge and without experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	Because I see a foolish doctor who treats an abscess of the womb or neck of a woman, and treats the arteries of the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	for so much blood flows out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I see another doctor who treats a stone of a man's water, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called by the doctor, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they had removed it well he would have died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I see another doctor who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the doctor, out of ignorance, held the breakage against the wound with a strong bandage, and did not leave the wound to heal itself, and thus he made it terminal;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded that it should not be untied at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and then he delayed so that his leg was completely swollen and his feet went to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I dislocated it thus it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But entirely the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member so that the member was almost entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another mirror that burst into an abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two sections:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	it is to know whether there is danger in many dispositions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish mirrors cannot speak evil of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in custody, and undertake your maladies lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let the maladies expel the grievous sanities;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and remove your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says among some of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take a bad malady in hand, lest you be called foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cautery and medicinal cautery, and these chapters are arranged from the head to the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and about the forms of instruments, and the iron instruments of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups, and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it is the chapter organized and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is organized according to the lame head just as feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we must remember in our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid, and of nuisance, are the longest speech and subtle science and the hidden responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about this they spoke of the wisest men, and agreed to it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I suffered few words, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, before it forms complexes.
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	It's knowing a warm temperament without material, and a dry temperament without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a warm and dry temperament together with material, they devised none and said that cauterization is great aid;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cauterization is not effective for an illness that comes from chill and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is warm, and it should not be used to cure a warm illness with chill, nor through dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and he said that whoever says the opposite, that cauterization makes great aid to warm and dry illnesses that come from the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in no way should one interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of temperaments of men, and their dispositions and the causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complications we have no less fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member unless poorly named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The fiery medicines pass from one member to another by connecting, and bring diseases of bitter sanitation to the limb;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and sometimes kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not make it so, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and established it on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I reveal the secret which is hidden or fiery, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher said in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	For you receive in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and take precautions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the surrounding injuries are often relieved by the aid of cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and meanwhile, the cauteries are for necessary pains and swift ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And think nothing of it, dear son, as if they do foolish mirroring.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the illness that is healed by cautery has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	and they say thus.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so as they think, because cauteries are not just a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the hastening of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and its dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it happens that the disease often becomes worse according to the patient's temperament and the location of the disease and its strength.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are gathered in him the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, so that it is not cauterized in a place where there is little excess and moisture, just as cauterization is dense for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization is effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauterization the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures for some disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient ones said that cauteries of golden instrument are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and because of the height of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the handles of the cautery do not make putrefaction, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I found that it is true in some homes;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and golden cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And however when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is hot because of the color of gold, and it is almost immediately cooled;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	they make to the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough of obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cauteries that we have made more suitable to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have ordered this chapter of the loud chief just at the foot, because the way should be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	For the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and they are used because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, ears, and multitude of sounds and pain in the teeth and throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicinal solution modifying the head, three or four times, according to what the strength and age and the habituation of the patient can suffer;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the patient rest the head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your shoulder;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and there where your two fingers meet, if it bleeds from the notch, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because that is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the marked spot of ink, and make it descend and withdraw your hand little by little, turning it round and round;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see the bone in its small hole;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, then recommence the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	afterwards take a little silk, and put in a soft and moist cotton therein, and put it on the spot, and leave it three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after putting a small hammer in the burr;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let it be until the inflammation is reduced;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the old ones said that the more one delays opening the wound, the more it suppurates;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason it is often helped.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one of them should leave the cautery so much that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that one should cauterize as long as one leaves it, and thrust so strongly that one evacuates the bone as widely as the veil that women put on their forehead to show that the humors are often driven out;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one should leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after that, one should cure and sew.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some cases where there is a way of fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should let them grow;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by continuous natural remedies, as we have demonstrated in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more saving and gentle for me, and thus I often use it in assembling health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the entire head comes with chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then one should use the patient's remedies such as yreis and pills which are called "cochiae", and of purging the head and eyes and of applying plaster.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, and it is not worth anything.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then the fire cauterizer is applied below, burning a little, as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After making a fire cauterizer on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cauterizer at the place that is called "vasselez".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is there that one puts ventoses;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patients feel much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauterizers of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the tenderness of the head, and this is the method:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When suddenly pain occurs in one part of the head, and the disease has spread to the eye, and the head is purged by mondifying medicines, and one has done the other treatments that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not profit at all:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then you make cauteries according to two methods, namely medical cautery and iron cautery.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The medical cautery is that you take a dose of salt, and remove the scab and recovers the little piece of skin at the place where the pain is holding in such a way that you can replace the dose of salt beneath the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it will be replaced, bind it and hold it well and leave it thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then unbind it and draw out the dose of salt, and leave the wound thus for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put on a cotton padding soaked in borax until it makes a scab.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of the wound, until it be healthy;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that I have written about some burning medicines or twelve treatises on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery where it is in the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has a little curvature, and in a thousandth of a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the skin's thickness is cauterized;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so that the artery does not get hardened, which is deficient, and runs with abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards put cotton in oil of seat, and put it on the place for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then I put moistened cotton in poultice, and then cure the place of inflammation until it be healthy;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at all points, and beware of cutting the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migrane as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned beforehand in medicine do not suffice for it, then it is necessary to heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" so that it becomes white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and mark thus on the painful spot a line of half a finger's length, and raise your hand once, and hold it steady so you do not touch the artery and do not approach too close to the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the jaw that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the disorder of blood in the artery when it is touched, where touching brings great fear and dismay to him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the vein be in my way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it often happens.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound at the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said in the chapter on extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has two cutting edges;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and these are better cauteries than those and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other treatments which we have mentioned in the section, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery, called "points", because of its shape.
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncturing all around the ailing ear, or around the two where the pain holds in both, and detach a little below the root of the ear before you have designated the place of the incision;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and let there be X points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, the limb so that it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	from the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Pain that should be cured by cauterization is not fierce except for those that move with inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make a cauterization on similar things that come from dryness and numbness of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this type of pain that moves with inflammation and purging of the head and gurgling, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauters:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the joint of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cauter in the part that appears healthy, and make him cauterize the top of the ear a little above the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let the cautery iron be so hot that the tender skin is almost burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and it's the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it's similar to the scalpel that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the cuts be a bit larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the wound thus as I have said before, until it be sound.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then you make three cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the vein which is called "vassels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let it be treated thus as we have said before.
de litargie	of the sluggishness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large years and mild pills modifying the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	afterwards, place the whole head of the patient on the occiput, the plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the treatises of plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of the cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is thus healthy, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not, do three cauterizations on the skin of the head descending to the neck, and leave a space between each cauterization of two fingers' width;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it as the others, and if you see that it is put off, and the patient is suffering, do one cauterization in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the masterpiece is, do two others on the two horns, and treat until he is healthy;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery be called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of what we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	afterwards cleanse the head of the patient, then apply cautery to the head and on each horn, and behind and three on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then apply four cauteries on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it be until the worst heat is burnt, and raise your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until he is healthy, and let the cautery be called "olivare" which we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use fire cautery unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to modify the treatment of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patients are great and suffer from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, then apply gargling and mastication purifying the brain often with good meat;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king has examined the patient, and he makes the cautery according to what we have said before, and he applies the cautery to the little vessel, and to each corner.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is weak and suffers, he makes cauteries as I have said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and so the olive-tree cautery according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive fluids or corrupt and gross moisture, then you should apply fire cautery to those areas as we have said to one who has been paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is declining excessive fluids into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, according to what is written in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king examines the patient's head;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after he makes the well-made tourniquet, just like a circle, and places it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient is stretched out, and held firmly in all directions;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after presenting the ligament, and wounds are treated with old borage powder;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and the heat is tempered with fire, so that the fingers can bear to apply the poultice to suffer;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After viewing the circle within inward towards the head, and let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this for the patient every week once with another good government bone, as long as he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you see that it is cauterized, make points more often all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cautery moisturizes the brain immediately;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on a cotton molehill in mud and in fat of a hen.
de l’awe des eulz	of the heat of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When heat comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begins and gives drink to the patient something warming the head, and warding off all moisture, and makes them sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After commanding to shave his head, and make him undergo cautery in the head, and apply two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the faculties is as both eyes are alike, or if the descent is in one eye.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and seize all the cauteries on all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of cloth as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery, how you will restrain it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes one performs cautery or branding beneath the two hindmost ribs.
dou cors des larmes	Here is the translation:
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear at the back of the head before;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that it is from the cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I spoke of at the beginning of the vein descending to the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I perform cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or brandings beneath the two ribs.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it is more bothersome, then one cauterizes slightly above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	two courses of tears deep within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give three cups of wine to the patient.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after the king's head, and make a cautery or a thousand gold coins worth of olive oil;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauteries worth of cautery which is called "clavus" on the two sorcils, a little below the eyebrows;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery that you do not puncture it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of that which is in the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that making two cauteries on the two sorcils is as long as the sorcils are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	It sometimes happens that the hair of the eyes is converted into a pustule, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	it's about fire, or ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	Where the fire cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they are born and are even, then put the patient in good health;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	afterwards, draw on the parchment of the eyes a figure that is as much like the leaf of a dead tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put a cotton wad soaked in the yolk of an egg and a musk-like substance from a pearl on the eye, then heat up the cautery to the form that it is;
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the heat may be carried to the exact spot;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of health in the work are that you see the paper drawn back, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then I put moist cotton in a bath until the inflammation is reduced;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of the joint until it be sound.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after that the hairs grow, and the paper is softened then recommence the cautery on the same spot, just as you did previously;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are broken, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The fiery medical cauteries are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are great and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and lively chalk, of each a .Z., and crush them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it hastily, so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the form you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease holds in one only sore, then one must operate on one, and if it is ambidextrous also;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put beneath the eye a moist cotton in a bath of egg white;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and let the head of the patient be in your healthy state and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the pouch and the cotton cloth all the times that the patient feels biting of the medicine, for it feels biting as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have had this done for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting will be past, lift the lever of awe, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted also as if it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is thus, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If this is not so, set the medicine again on the wound or the medicine has not worked, until your works are equal, and your eyes are at a point;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a cotton molehill in a burst until the hearts of arsenic are taken, after curing the wound of the junction which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it be healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you are master of your operation, beware well to keep a great watch that the medicine does not slip from your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that wound which is softened by the proper paper, thus as you have done beforehand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure until it be healthy;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and that is the form of the leaf of dead myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and in smallness, and according to this will be your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and does not return to the right path for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cautery in this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does he nod his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	afterwards apply a cotton pad soaked in water of an iris or in juice of persley on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	afterwards heat the cautery which is thus:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped at the head like the form of a vaulted pen, so that it may be the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, it should be pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see, it should be also like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but anyway, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing on the fistula, it is uncovered, and one draws out the putrid matter, and the dryness.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and it is closed, if it opens, and one draws out foreign bodies from the bowel;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after placing the hot cautery in the form of a burning iron, and holding your hand on the cautery at the part near the eye of the nail, so that your hands do not play foolishly;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If that does not work, then recommence the cautery once more, and another time you have mastery of it, and leave it three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after I put on a cotton milliet in a poultice, and cure the disiccation of the ointment until it is healthy, and if forty days pass without it being healthy, then I put on a corrosive medicine as long as the bone is uncovered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the king according to what he came into his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Then make a fistula, and sew up the place;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after putting in the incision I introduce a subtle cane where it is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make a quantity of an ounce of poultice;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand or cane firmly, and the patient does not move at all, so that the poultice, melted, does not run to its saucer;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the saucer of the patient a cotton wad soaked in egg whites or in water;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the poultice thus heats the place of the fistula, and the health appears wonderfully through the marvel of sanitation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer pectorals to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is necessary for its own wound.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times we have seen cracks in the lips that are called "pox", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds of the head that we have mentioned in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And you put it hastily in those cracks as long as it comes just to the source;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the place of the scab, as long as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the gum or in the eye socket, or in the roots of the teeth, after putrefaction and rot and becomes swollen and turns into a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit at all:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you apply the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron rod comes to the font of it, and where the rear of the hand;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do thus once or twice, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it be healthy;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and cut out the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	two movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then put the patient's head in a healthy position;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heating the cautery whose form will come thus afterwards in such a way that you put a chain on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after lifting your hand and recommencing the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after filling the patient's mouth with salty water, and holding it for an hour and releasing forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or glass, and the treatments of medicine do not help, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery of borax and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cautery of borax is such that you take borax from a vessel, and the end in an iron or copper spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and moisten it in borax boiled, and place it on the aching tooth hastily and hold it until it cools;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the moist cotton and borax become cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and place it in the hot iron so that the faculty reaches the decay of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauteries assembled with fire are such that you take an iron or copper rod, and it should be thick so that the faculty does not reach the mouth of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After the fire branding, because of this the abscess forms hereafter, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand so long as the branding iron cools down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do it thus often, for the pain will be alleviated that same day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good warm water in the impression of that branding iron, and then spits it out forcibly.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that is the form of a good branding iron:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a branding iron according to what you wish for the head, and according to what you are able.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and that is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scabs
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of a flow and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then brand the iron from which afterwards comes the form, and it has two openings for the fumes to issue out from the branding iron on the other part.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and put the fire cautery hot on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the root of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, then put cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put on a cotton cloth moistened in balm so that the discharge is drained away;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, treat the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moisture affects the channels of the arm, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with solutive medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	after you do cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the fire cautery, another cautery is applied to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and this cautery is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal the limb as we have said before, so that it may be healthy.
de la toust	of the injury
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all diseases of the lung are from cold and moist vapors, and the patient does not have fever or cough, and it is an old disease, then apply two cauteries to the ribs in their places;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery between the chest between the breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and this cautery is called "clavicle" according to the shape that was mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, apply cautery in pricking to the whole cautery called "points" because the shape is thus before in the disease of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the points be just up to XXX, or prick within.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them in one application.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, soothe the patient on their back and on their side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	afterwards, lift the heart that is within the swollen area with the fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two nodes because it is in the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart as long as it pierces just to the side, and would come the figure of the cautery together with three cauterizes;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and because of this, cautery is made with the cautery that has three nodes, because the figures of cauterization are six cauterizes;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the cautery that has three nodes:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it adjusted on this nerve because there are 8 cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After applying fire cautery, burn with a porous brand;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After making the patient rest, and do not move the limbs too far for as long as it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then make cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is restored, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach there come coldness and much moisture as it withdraws from its complexion, and multiple cathartics are applied to him, and customary cure methods do not help, then it is necessary that the patient be supported on his back, and stretches out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From that point on, apply three fire cauteries below the hollow of the thigh for the quantity of a finger, to all the cauterized area, and two cauteries above the two sides as long as the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and let there be space between one and another so they are not joined together when they will be applied;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cautery be so profound that it penetrates the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterizes by pricking and signs on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you see of the inch;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then he cauterizes all the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, so that it be healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, so much that it is far removed from its natural complexion through the excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, if it is necessary that the patient be treated on his body;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and signs of the inch three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, driving away the hypochondries, there where the sides of the stomach come;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and let there be a space between each cautery the width of a finger;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cautery be of the same length as the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the whole cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let it (the cautery) be so subtly applied to the middle of the heart, and let the patient's right hand be on their feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, let him sit, and stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the method:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you want to, you should cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would make it dry up the entire body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it not approach the navel, because the heart is very subtle there, and one should beware of seeing it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too extreme;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if he is in the membrane, the patient feels intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment affects the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be warned about his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then indicate the location where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery that resembles the root, from which this form is:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery as much as the skin becomes burnt, and reach just below the sphac, so that the pores are entirely closed.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment, according to the treatment of the evacuations until he is healthy;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not necessary that anyone uses this cautery except those who have studied extensively in the art of medicine, and whose hands these diseases have corrected many times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then it can hardly work, and always it seems to me that moving is better than leaving.
dou cautere de pleuresin	with fire cautery of the pleura.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancient ones said that one must make full cauteries of roots according to Aristologus, and in such manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of Aristologus as long, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and let it be as thick and as long as your fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the forearm and the neck, and make small cauteries a little downwards in the part that is beneath the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and make cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a little;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and make a cautery in the thigh, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the thigh below the cautery that is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press with your hand, but rather make it open as if in an odor;
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they directed an old man who was using fire cautery similarly to a razor, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it came to that abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and thus it was the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the spleen
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then they resort to three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Thereupon one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, in a line according to the length of the affected part, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be comfortable on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the heart which is opposite the affected part, or where the sides of the patient come from the left, and let the elevations that you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After they burn the two veins so that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then draw fire from the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, if you cauterize the entire cautery to three veins.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has obtained purification by long tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned beforehand.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery does not work for hydropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the area of the thigh;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauteries be very close to the width of a finger.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time, and do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the key that we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here beforehand.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of citrus-colored water, it is necessary that you cautery on the back of the foot between the auricular and the anular;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not insert it too deeply, lest the yellowish fluid would flow out, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Afterwards, do two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cutaneous vein;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be of a long duration, one below the kneecap in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries on for a long time without removing them, so that the water goes out;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatment of other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a stomach problem comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you make a great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been spoken about before, or cauterization of the stomach, to circular cauterization;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and three cauterizations within the subtle bowel to the entire subtle cauterization, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each island, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all, if you make cauterizations:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	On the spine of the back, which is all deformed below in a slanting triangle, and I apply fire cautery to the nodule twice.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that the stomach is chilled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflamed, then apply a great deal of fire cautery to the stomach, as it has been said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the fiery cautery.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the fire cautery penetrate deeply for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let the limb be until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness that is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you grasp the hip, heat up the fire cautery that seems to be soothing, and then apply it all ablaze to the grasped hip.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand stay there until the fire cautery reaches the birth of the vein, so that the blood flows freely.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much of the hip, cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After the treatment of eye injuries, it is beneficial as long as they are healthy.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the affected area, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, if there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When an abscess comes to a fistula, and it is wrapped and casts forth putrid and corrupt moisture, if you prove all of it with a subtle probe, and take care that you know the entire depth of the probe.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery that seems to be the remedy, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tension is entered, and recommence the cautery as long as the corrupted body parts are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of their need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and guard against the hard nerves that are inflamed, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, then guard against these abscesses, and do not make those false passages in the flesh, and think that it is not a personal problem.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after treating the flesh until it is healthy, and if the abscess is healed, and the materials are removed at length, then know that the abscess is entirely healthy.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the materials are not removed, it means that the joints are twisted, and corrupts the bone at the source;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus as one of those things that we will direct to its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes with rheumatism, and great windiness, and does not take the temperament of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on the joints on one side and the other, with the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will bring greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then it is necessary to perform cautery on the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as the width of a thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and you make a fire cautery on the back, or if it is swollen there beside.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cauteries be shaped according to the previously mentioned form.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauteries be shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moistures descend to the hollow of the thigh, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the limbs of departure are visible, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the box of the hip at the cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the limb within the box as it turns, so that the box should be inside the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not present for you, make three cauteries of large olive-trees, and let the cauteries be as deeply penetrating as all the wounds.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until he is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the ankle
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the box of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humor of foul-smelling pills or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After doing cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of doing cautery is according to two manners:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	it is to know assembling burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the skin of the thigh three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and size, and have between each cauterization a space the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes one does cauterization in the middle on the head of the thigh, because there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, then cauterize at the cautery of a circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the thigh;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a manner that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the heart are burnt.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And it is the manner in which one does on sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it reaches the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and three cauteries above the knee, on the left side a little;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery be cutting, and let the spaces of the heart be burnt;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near the ankle, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if the master is, make them do more;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if they know that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make them do a cautery at the cutting or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater annoyance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have performed fire cautery on the shin of the foot, and they let it be until the leg was entirely swollen, and the feet also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a flux of belly that he got death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, perform fire cautery on one and on the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men said in the cautery of the ankle, because it is the manner, make it thus fierce and be at the top as big as a thumb's width, or a little less, and be between the tendons and be from one tendon to another, spanning the width of a thumb.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the tendons be exposed in two parts, and also be like nails, and have a well-made iron hand.
et c’est li forme:	and that is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is completely red-hot and emits sparks, and then place it on the diseased ankle's joint, and turn it to the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and let it be cauterized once with the cautery reont and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make a plaster of borax, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of joint adjustment so that it becomes healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its appearance, and we see few who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and yet this is one of the good cauteries, which can suffer him, and there where it afflicts him.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cauteries of medicine are so that you make the instrument at the joints in which it descends to the edge of the door, and be of iron or copper a long bar, and in the height it has II among us, and each one has the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be open below and above, and they join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After putting on the box of the hip to the patient lying on his good side, and then put your hand well on the box of the hip.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After the hand is placed between the two circles of the warm water which has been heated by fire, and it is left for an hour and a half, and then the patient suffers from heat and numbness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it finds mortification as if from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the mortifications have passed, he raises his hand with the instrument and lifts the warm water of the bath, and lets it sit thus for three days, and applies a poultice until what is black from the burn is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and he lets it sit for three days so that putrefaction is straitened;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds, so that they may be healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, he makes an instrument that draws warm water according to what you have done in the bath already.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and it is the manner of warm water, and I have written about treating with the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of live alkaline and hot ash, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where he has a small perforation behind so that the point of a razor cannot enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put behind that pot another well-plumbed pot, and put on top of alkaline and chalk and warm water above, so that there is a duo of powders beneath which you will have prepared well in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it sit thus until it descends into warm water and reaches the well-plumbed pot, then take all that water, and pour it over chalk and alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And when it will be very warm and is administered in many works of medical treatment and in cauterizations of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs the same work as fire, and if there are other medicines which one cauterizes well with the thigh thus as thesis and honey and nut oil and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us about a cure where one man was cured of the pain in his vein and sciatic nerve, and the doctor said that there is no other cure, and that he was healthy at once when this cure was done, and he was bathed as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And it is in this manner that you take the fresh and dry litargire herb, and crush it well with a little fat, and put it on the ankle and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain holds, and the ligament.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and let it be for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the bitterness.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then have him enter a warm bath so that his body is somewhat relieved, and have him enter bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with hot iron, it helps a lot;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it should be done, making the cauterizations in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and the warmth of old oil, and apply it to the hollow which is between the thumb of the foot and the other called fossile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry hot iron, and heating it to fire until it is red-hot coals, and putting it on the wool, and leaving it until it is extinguished;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do it again thus, and do not cease from doing thus until you think by sensation that it reaches the ankle, and that the pain is ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of the vein".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain from the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or too great an evacuation, or from similar matters of cold expanded material, none of these similarities is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is suitable after that the patient is freed from foul pills or similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery that is called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the cautious moderate cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow belly when they get up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the last spine of the back and in the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, then apply the cautery according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If fire cautery takes hold of each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cauterize along the spine with a painful cautery at two or three lines, and let the points be close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in curvature which is in a spasm of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain in the joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and treatment with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such a manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the bundle of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the olive-shaped cautery be according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you prick on the surface of the foot, then make cautery at all the cautery that one calls "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, all with an olive-shaped cautery;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have mastery of more, then make more, but do not hold your hand firm for only as long as the skin of the heart is burnt.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, one administers the cautery that we have spoken of in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the fingers in two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if it remains a point of pain as two, then make punctures above each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come just as they are cut or just as they are separated, then cauterize each part, and make good governance for the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good governance for him and you purge bad blood, he will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of the Syphac
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a fracture comes from anger, and the bones descend to the joints and it is new, then it is necessary that when you want to cure the limb, it does not harm anyone on that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things that loosen the belly, if his flanks descend from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after he sits on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the bone is repaired, and reset it with your fingers, and make a sign of an inch below the fracture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that resembles half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat the cautery to the form of the place where it is.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until he is clear and he throws off sensitiveness.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bowls to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return backward;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs of the patient, and put the cushion under him and the sergeant on the thighs, and another on the foot which holds his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again another time until you arrive at the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and guard subtly so that the bowl does not slip when you perform the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not approach the bone with caution, your operations are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterizers of children be subtle according to the measure of their ages, and of great men also great according to their measure.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, heal the limb with a cautery of borax until the inflammation is removed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after healing other wounds as long as it takes to be healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well suppurated;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst open when he gets up to go to chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made splint is applied to him, and he carries it for another 40 days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, so that he exercises little and guards against too great a repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high a temperament.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he does this instruction, he will be entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will describe hereafter the treatment of surgical cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	from the gut of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come to other venters and are congealed, and you see that they do not grow more, then have the fire cautery made according to its quantity, and be careful with the third degree of heat.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of the inch and make a line according to the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the fire cautery instrument.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more moderate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to a member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain holds for a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torments and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healthy from the first cautery, it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	by this name, recommend another cautery on that one, for it is customary that it should be changed in the limb that is nearest to it, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of the malady
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The muscles are often helped many times by cautery with great aid, and especially the illness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	You cannot see that it should be cauterized, take heed because the disease is at the beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption may infect the whole patient, then you do five cauteries on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I apply heat to the new wound, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the ulcers.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and it is beneath the horns, and behind towards the little finger.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I leave it as long as my hand that the cauterization comes just to the bone, and until the scabs fall off so that the vapors of the great humors can exit.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and I cauterize on the tender spot according to what is before it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the evil is scattered throughout.
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it appears manifestly, so it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauterizations that we have said above the head, and I cauterize on the neck, and II on the spine of the neck, and VI on the spine of the back, and I on the chest and another on the sides, and II on the shoulders.
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and it is on the joints, and it is on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are on the last vertebrae of the spine, so you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never make a cauterization on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more you do cauterizations, the more they hinder, and they harm instead of helping;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the sick do not feel any pain from the cauterization if they sense it like a healthy person, because their body is already almost completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After healing, anoint the wound with flour paste mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When inflammation comes to a member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not completely healthy, then you make cauterizations on the member according to its size and smallness of the member.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cautery be a little deep in the width of the skin;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wounds so that they are healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And often one makes cautery on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the outlet of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if there is swelling;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and never get involved in it unless one is knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of swellings
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the tools of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the width of the skin, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then heal with flour of ferns and of lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of the colon and blood of the almond tree, each a part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be entirely assembled, and let it be tied with a bandage, and let it be raised to the place until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a cancer appears at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that seems like a circle, entirely around the tumor.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And the wise men said that one should also perform cautery at the middle of the channel of the tumor;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and I do not think that is good, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to avoid it happening at all times;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a more direct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation which cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays from getting better or because of the superfluity that it does or because of the eagerness of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too weak) and he has little blood, or because of the tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you hasten to amputate:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then you cauterize within a lot of small areas by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards, let it be so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it hastens to measure.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through all the cautery, heat up the cautery of that which is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" so that the cauteries have pierced the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels discomfort in some manner that the course of the pus is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment so that it may be perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the cure by fire through iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a withering of a limb, for it withers the limbs just as the fire dries the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer from cauterization together with fire, then heat the small and large cauterizing irons, according to what is necessary for the patient or where the disease is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	afterwards, cauterize all parts so that you extract all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and place on the patient's cauterized areas a warm poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are eliminated, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of swollen eyes producing discharge.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's bad.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then recommence the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limbs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this mangy condition has never been cured by medicine except in cases of fire cauterization.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but every way fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of the medicine for the fever in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take the quantity that you have in hand.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	for the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that our feet are afflicted by a disease called "closed" according to our intention, and it is a large faulty thing which bruises the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations of this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cauterization and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is that you heat I heated cautery as if it were a pen of vaulted iron, and let it be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	after heating the entire hot iron on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it stay thus for three days until it begins to purge pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a plaster of wild, savage, bruised mallows with oil, and let the plaster stay on throughout the night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the limb of the injured joint by straining it so much that it becomes healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are turned away from the body by ulcers, and often happens in the hands and feet, it is necessary that you apply warm water cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in such a manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a cane of iron or a hollow tube, and place it on the nail and the heel, that is to say for removing warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the cane on it so that it encircles everything around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand in turning so that the edge of the cane reaches to the root of the nail, and thus finds the warm water way deep into the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the warm water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it thus, and it will uproot everything to its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus you do one after another, as long as you stretch out those that are in the body, then heal the wounds that inflame flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do three or four fire cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one on the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive-shaped cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	let the shivering cease, and hasten the health of those suffering from cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-producing pimples
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No time is apparent through the skin's baths, or pus-filled pustules, which come from corrupted gross matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	it is necessary at first when they appear that one should do fire cautery on each head of the pustules:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle fire cautery of myrtle wood, so that the point is seized by the fire, or of a long root of aristology, or with a lentiform cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but are dispelled the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut into the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And however when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold very still so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue forth more;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then apply to the fire the olive oil cauterizers, many small and large ones, as long as they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take I, or large or small according to the wound and the location where the artery is located, and apply the cauterizer to that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterizer there until the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries which are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease from doing one thing after another until the wound is closed.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not aggravate the weak nerve which is nearby, and that another evil does not come to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when the wound does not close due to the artery, one cannot well restitch it meanwhile when the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three methods that we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to stop bleeding;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and be bound and held firmly in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the stanching of the bleeding tightly with bandages or puts things around it, or similar things, does not profit if they do not do it well.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if it happens to anyone and there is no miry or present medicine, one should put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind well until it is closed above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the finger, but rather the mill of cold water often so that it is very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and rested;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries beforehand about those things which require cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have said in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicines, and the indications and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed this chapter among the lowest chapters, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because it is found to be lighter than what one would desire.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for a cure.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such as are weary of their illness that they die easily from the desperation that they find in their disease, and from the greatness of their wickedness;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and of these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these there is who gives you his judgment, and says:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is despised.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those things of which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that health may be converted;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and memory of longevity.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here is the translation:
dou chief plein d’aigue	Here is the translation:
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	You know that this disease often comes from children to the mother, and when the womb holds the child's head too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from a reciprocal cause that is not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I never saw this disease except in children, and all those whom I have seen hasten their death;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in certain treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw the child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much every day that it could not bear to be supported;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture increased so much that it was mortal, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the symbaphacos, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the operations are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, so you make a large incision in the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it be as long as II (two inches), as far as the moisture extends;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see here the form of the spatula-like instrument:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head turned upwards from each part, and the water jumps forth quickly when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	if it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture completely afterwards.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	Afterwards, bind up the incisions with drapaulx and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it like that until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then unbind, and treat the wound with tinctures and ointments, and let the head be straightened, and give nourishment to the patient's dry and withered flesh as little moisture as possible until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you open up the greatness of the abscess, and assemble the water;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it is never before;
aucune fois derrier;	never behind;
aucune fois en destre;	never to the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water, and make it so according to what you have the power;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let flow a little blood, so that the patient may die from the decay of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of swelling
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens that a disease is called "catarre" in the eyes or in the chest, and the disease is chronic, and medical treatment does not benefit, then the last resort of treatment is cauterization with fire which cleans the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary, therefore, when you cauterize, that the patient makes his head back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rubbing the limb with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, then stretching the patient's neck over the entire cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the veins beat, and the lines of one and the other are behind the ears, and a little are responded;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the lines of the injection, then touch one and the other with a sharp instrument of two edges, so that the vein's tail reaches just to the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, put the pointed instrument below the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as much as two fingers wide across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not appear to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of three fingers' width, then mark the injection and make it just to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and it is necessary to put blood flow there if it is six fingers' width, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone where it is painful, if the skin that covers it does not become infected, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of the joint until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of the migrating (or possibly "of the wandering")
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the migrating pain arrives, and catarrh is sharp, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and apply cauterization, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples fall, and attends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is rarely found except in some homes that are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and when it is found, the patient strains their neck of certain cloths, then rubs the place with a rough cloth, and raises the place with warm water as much as the artery opens manifestly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula in the form of which it is there:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with pincers, and separate well the layers that are beneath each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the uncle, then cut according to the quantity of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Because she is not caught, if he does not know the saneness all over.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And let three kinds of blood flow from the six veins, just up to the third;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you ligate it in two loops of a strong double silk thread, which prevents bleeding before the suturing of the wound, and prevents excessive bleeding.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut the superfluity that is between the two ligatures at that same hour, and then, if you see fit, if you will, cauterize with a cellular cautery up to the bone as long as the heads are cut.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is the moderate work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauteries are helpful in ending the moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greatest aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, one should fill the old vein with much cotton and place them on well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are detached, one should be careful with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healthy;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if you cut an artery thus far as you observe, hasten to stop it by cauterization, or fill the vein with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is stanched;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this remedy present, place your finger on the vein so the blood is congealed, and raise the vein with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it steady as it is necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and what is more moderate and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cautery of two parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid longer lingering of the heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And you should have between the two cauteries a space of two fingers, and then when you have signed in the two joints, and you pass the burning iron so that it reaches just to the bone, and covers the vein in the two joints.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be separated between the two parts of the body, because it is not customary to use this cautery everywhere in every part.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes fall down to the veins that are on the top of the chief part of the fire, and it does not benefit from a cure of medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feel or sense a difficult walking as if of frenzies.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and on whom the oil is tense and moist so that the hairs of the papers are fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, thus it needs this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it "cure contuse", and it is that you make three equal incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, so that the hairs grow evenly from the front, then make three equal slits on the forehead according to the length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the slits be thus, cutting into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others two as they meet the ribs above the papers, and beware of incising the arteries that are above the ribs on the papers.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and align your hand with the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and prepare a piece of sponge and wrap it in cloths to suck out the blood, then apply the spatula, adapted to the shape of the two parts from which it is formed.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision which goes down to the temple up to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all the crust which is between the two fissures to the whole syphac that is on the bone, then make another section from the mean incision up to the other second, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision, it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, not very sharp, and that's its form.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting tool sloping towards the airy flesh at the heart, and make the cutting smooth towards the bone, and cut as much as it reaches the middle seam.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut off the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues up to what opens into the bone, and then make another section in the mean fissure up to the other defect.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the blood equally, and press out the bone for the blood taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on moistened drapels with wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that apostemes do not grow there.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day, dissolve the lien, and I will mix great plenty of water, then the treatment of anointing with basilicon oil, and other treatments that one uses to treat wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	two edges of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When no vein is found with accustomed catarrh, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and to clear the view, and the burned papers;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and where the head is in front of a painful spot, and the patient is stunned;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you know by these accidents that those matters and that catharr come only from many veins, and the death that it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another one as wide as the thumb.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And start from the fracture of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be just up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and withdraw your hand from the nerves of the temples which move to the brain;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the two lips of the wound and put in much cotton, and bind with linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then lay moistened cloths soaked in wine and oil on top, and beware of a hot abscess;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is swollen, it is necessary that you rub the bone until the flesh begins to grow, then treat with exciting remedies that make flesh grow.
En teil maniere:	In such a manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth, and make a plaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply it to these wounds to grow flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	where grains, where beast, where stone of mine or similar thing as iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, like jasmine, beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or thing flowing like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the pierced ear or another manner of thing that does not adjust to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or oil of sesamum, then it facilitates extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and you make a condenser of condisi, and stop up the nostrils when the steam comes, and place around the ear pieces of drapery or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times fever comes forth through this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come forth, facilitate the extraction with subtle pincers, from which is its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it bursts forth with pincers, that's good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If this is not so, one must extract with subtle skill at the base of the small double-headed hernia.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and it does not jump through this, if you make a vein of silver and put the head of the vein at the orifice of the ear strongly, and block that which is around the vein of wax mole so that the veins cannot enter with the vein;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then the flow is formed, for many times it comes forth as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come forth in this manner, take glue from where you take the bones, and put some instrument that is at a point to make this happen, and put a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and let the flow come forth.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come forth from all these things that we have said, hasten to open the ear in such a way that an abscess forms on the vein, and spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of the incision is that you make the patient's head healthy first, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on the fat or flesh.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape according to your power, and suck hastily at your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are stones that are inside and they swell, then administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot exit, then administer the spatula instrument subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and makes an incision around that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do it when you think that the stones are moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	Then he holds the subtle pincers and the sucker, as we have said, so that the extractions should be aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water then that falls in the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses the sternum of condition first, and fills the ear with a lot of cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it rest on that same ear where the needle is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it jumps for fear, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, take many pierces according to the length of your thumb and fingers, and heat them a little over the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and insert the patient's one or pierced ear, and rise up to it from another part of his feet, and make a hole of another pierce on the pierce that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease making pierce upon pierce until the water issues forth entirely pure, and thus it springs forth entirely pure;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, take the join, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire until the most tender join is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then remake another part of the joins until the water issues forth entirely, as we have said in the pierce.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is large-bodied so that one can feel it, then prepare an extraction with pincers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the lightest thing to extract which may be in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you clear them as we have said in the division and where you treat the drips, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if you find no worms, then take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the candle of where it is in the form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck formally on the candle.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often so that all the veins appear.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey in coming out, then stop up within the canal of cotton as I have said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not sweat forth as we have said, then administer distilled remedies that the old ones have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat with distilled remedies;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and your medicines in the ear with this entire instrument, because it is the method as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether of silver or of copper, insert below into the small holes, and above cover with perforations for distilling;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press within the distillation with the copper instrument well-made for this, and if you see take the receiver and envelop it around the pointed cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then you pour your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cane, and the cane is in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put the entire cotton inside, and press your hand temporarily so that the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillations be warmed by fire in this way, so that they are distilled into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have some pertussis in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to men through swelling of wounds, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes come from deep within the ear, if one cannot see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes it happens that I almost lost the perforation, and I saw it was very good.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes from the font, if one cannot see it, is a grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which one sees, you must put the ear of the patient in the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look within:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the opacity appearing, if the work is all this spatium of wood where it is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting before and behind all flat, so that it does not block the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the opacity is of flesh born or growth of the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and touch it lightly, so that the flesh chars are all opened.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilations are deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle, light razor and heat it slightly over fire, then place it at the root of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the opacity where the patient feels great pain at the hearing, touch lightly, and beware that you do not injure the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and the mole in the Egyptian arrangement.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do nothing for a day until the wound is sewn, or take a tent and the mole in aqua rosa, and powder on broken glass.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace another mole-filled tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal him until he is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood discharge comes out, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the blood discharge which are or treat with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	It is the ulcer that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and cover with a spatula of its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on the place broken glass powder.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without a crust, the fire cautery of a subtle lenticular shape is applied, and the cautery operator is worth more after the incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times they repair, as nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not grow back.
de la gresle	of the sprain
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times there come in papers from the eyes things that seem rough in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	the works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take care that the grandine moves from one part to another, and it is an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	make the donor thus large, then scratch the skin of each lighter part, then take it with tweezers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cover the sense of perceiving a little of the paper, do not disturb anything to the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the wound is large, assemble it into a suture, and care for it until it be healthy;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not use any force, because the ligaments restore it quickly and without hindrance.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the vein is descending deep into the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper, and stretch the vein to pinches, and cover and press from one side and the other;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is separated by the incision, do not disturb anything;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the vein is covered, lift the eye of salty water, and care for the limb of those who are quickly restored so that the patient may be healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Here is the translation:
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because of this they lie on their faces again, and sleep on them, and are their papers underneath their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered the abscess which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the limb with your fingers and feel the crunching between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy tone;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a piece of linen, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains the abscess of each part, then put it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands, one part and the other, so that the abscess is assembled within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make a milestone of the moisture at the sharp point of the instrument, cutting a slit of a large size, and let it not be more large than the wound that one makes in the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin smooth in front as far as you come to the scar.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many dispositions comes a scar from the wound, according to the form of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Remove then at once a piece of cloth torn between your two fingers in front, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as far as it is scattered;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and beware that you do not press on the wound, that you do not come at all to the spatula just up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the scar does not open at the beginning of the wound, then increase it a little lightly so that it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then remove it as we have said, then wet the dressings in oil and in water, and put on the wound, and remove the bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break it and put it back to corrupt that moisture which is retained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then treat with poultices soothing until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When papers sprout hairs unnaturally besides their natural ones, and are wrapped up, if they harm the eyes, and bring about ways of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so that it is due to the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and it is the treatment in three ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	where by fire cautery, or by medicines applied according to whether it is before or behind the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by canes, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is converted, it is good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then prick a needle into all the thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be the margin of the parchment where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull the thread above all the parchment, and turn to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part beneath the parchment, beneath the aligned hairs, all along the spatula, from the large lancet just to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and place beneath the parchment a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the parchment a figure of an inch, as if the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated on the parchment which is divided into toes.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if it happens that one has mastery of coping with a great quantity of the parchment according to what the parchment is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make all along the spatula on the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the large lancet just to the small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let it be one of the natural fissures near the hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the tumor, then scrape thoroughly;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips at a seam of a needle with all the subtle thread of wool, and suck out the blood, and make a knot above the superficies of the threads on the two eyebrows to any glutinous things, if you want to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if it doesn't heal, then leave the seam and the threads for three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then cure the wound without a seam of things that are dry and constricting, for the skin relives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is murder (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and if there is another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you design the paper of a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, as we have told, in three ounces according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply this which overcomes small equal forces similarly to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle or it has one thread, and put the end in the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and put another thread from the large lantern, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble between your two threads evenly;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and heal it until it is healthy;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of wounds is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you convert the parchment and make it according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut as two heads of two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly above what surpasses the parchment of the eye, and stretch the two wounds of the two parts forcibly;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it be thus for some days, and the skin that is stretched will become numb and blacken and decay, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If he delays, if he has forces, then heal him as much as he is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer puncture the hairs;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and it's the shape of the two canes that you will make according to this design, and according to this quantity of length and width;
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and you pull the silk thread soft and subtle;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width long;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then order in the hunting another subtle thread of silk briefly, and tie the two heads of the thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then put the patient's head in your healthy one;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be beneath the sun so that the operations are declared, for it's a subtle and minor operation, then put the needle at the root of the hair implanted, and make it pierce the paper hastily as much as you draw it above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then shave the hair up to the wound, and put in the wound that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then extract your hand so that the hairs grow outward from the entire wound onto the parchment with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the wound is treated and the hairs do not grow with it, then you will pull the wound back to the bottom of the entire thread that you have ordained there, so that the wound grows outward from the top and you see it by the sight of the eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you will pull the wound and the thread, and shut the eye and let it be shut for two or three days, until the hair takes root in its place and the flesh grows over.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, then accompany a long hair of natural whiskers, and be elevated with that one or you let it, until it is elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the rotting of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the porridge comes into the eye, if there are two manners:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	One natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of the work in this is that you split that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and bind it so that it may be healthy;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not suitable that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I work with softening things, as with fenugrec.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose water or altee and flaxseed oil being cooked, and anointments of yaquilon melted in one of the oils, and I wrap a bandage, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care not to let it settle according to the form it had before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these treatments that we have mentioned are not forces that address this illness, so it does not return according to the form it had before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh which comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is beneath, truly called "axacrati", and is naturally accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the method of treatment is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and you insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the thread passes through the head of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then the flesh is sewn on top over the entire needle, and the scalp is covered with a spatula-like instrument large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the skin of the paper returns according to what it should be, that's good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If this doesn't happen, take the razor and put it in the seam, and turn the paper, and make two seams or stitches within the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the head of the two seams be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is like the shape of a letter which is not "I griesche";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges are adjusted from below, from what follows on the paper, then add the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of linen;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the treatment with those softening medications that we have mentioned, and with tinctures, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a seam or a stitch or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain seam below the hairs of the papers, and according to what is written before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then uncover between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to have ingenuity in all they can do to make it return to its natural shape;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patients themselves, according to what they require of work and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	you burn of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this joint has its main bond in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it up high;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and hold as pincers, until you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too dull, so that the patient cannot suffer from the spatula being too sharp and bleeding the oil;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision be such that you lightly scrape off the assembled (skin), so that the paper regains its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it is healthy all assembled, and never again in the sharp bitter oil, and raises gentle warmth, and of cooling.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put between the paper and the oil a strip of linen, and put on the oil a moistened wool in abundance of egg whites.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day use gentle cooling and soothing things until it be healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail is according to two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and resembles a hard thick skin, and another which is not nervous, but resembles a whitish moist congealed moisture, that when one touches it with iron and cuts it with pincers, if it cannot be.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and one and another similar thing starts towards the large armorer, and increases little by little until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and hold the paper in your hand, then bend the finger as pinces of small doubling, and stretch it upwards;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and insert the hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of an ox, and pull it strongly;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the finger, and pass it through the entire needle, and tie the finger with a thread and stretch it upwards, and strip all the hair from the side of the finger which follows the prick and the vein to the head, then cut the remaining part at the root of the arm, completely subtle and with small forces, and let the natural skin or arm, so that by the incision, the flow of tears does not come habitually;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the nail on the thumb alone hurts, and the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the scab forms all over the spatula-like soft tissue from which it is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And beware that the spatula-like instrument does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the prunella is not perceived;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour into the oil a little of warm broth, and make a poultice of litharge, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal those who need it as much as they should be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot inject the needle, and the nails cannot enter, often a cure is achieved with this type of nail medicine;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and it grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, then open the oil of the patient, and take the lighter spatula-like instrument according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the ankle subtly, and if you see that it diminishes at no point and the reason presses on it, then distill from your mouth into the collier oil made of litargire and red dou, and stop up the oil just until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then restart the other work according to the same method, until it is completely restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, so that an abscess does not form, then heal it first, and cure the hot abscess as much as it is healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh shows damage from the lamprey oil at night through great trouble, then suspend it on the ninth day, and take one part and not all, lest the course of the lampreys does not come to life;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill into the red collier oil which is made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	It is the eyes of certain men who never had red flesh, and they cover the plumule and hold steady on the papyrus and turn to the devil, and resemble a rose of balaust.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the operations are that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes, and gather all those things which are conveniently adjacent to it, and hold them with strength;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first vein, and continue cutting to the resection just up to the end, and be careful that you do not blind the eye during the operation;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be spatula-like, which we have described in the incision of the ankle and with small forces where one opens the sepulcher, just as the form appears after this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is opened, apply the oil of broiet or where you distill coliere rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a piece of cotton with albumen of egg, so that it may be assured against a hot abscess;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it stays there, and the blood flows beneath, and you suspect an abscess forming beneath, let the eye be still and treat the abscess with soothing things that reduce the abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work so that it may be healthy, and thus you make a straight characteer in the eye by this likeness.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But always it is necessary that you adapt the treatment to each weak eye according to its natural condition;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the accidental way, in work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works unless you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and they take away its function and obscure the eye for many years.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the eye, in which it is, is strong, and there is no other illness besides the cataract.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then touches it in such a manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put their head in their healthy tone, then suspend those veins all around according to his wisdom, and let the subtle double onions be according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be treated with a ninth-degree cautery, in the fourth sign of the zodiac according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then one wraps the subtle veins strongly, and extracts the blood hour after hour, until you see removing the veins that are far from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and beware that you do not blind the eye at the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you do not grasp further than those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red colour to corrupt what is still dirty within the eyeball.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are not able to collect all this in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and it is assured that there will be no hot abscess, then restart according to this method which is presented above so that it may be healthy.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and it's the form of the strengths:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat it with cautery and ardent medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if there is an engine in it that you divide above the abscess, where it must be drained, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take out all the instrument of which it is the form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "asper chief", and it should be made of iron indeed at the chief edge, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put it on the level of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the limb with exciting medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the limbs are swollen, and the flesh is raw, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not recover and is not apostemized, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this does not work, then there is another technique to bring the fistula back to the perforated nose according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with bitter medicines, and when it is uncovered, take the forestay according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be attenuated up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone of the armier, and stretch out your hand to the eye of the pouch, then turn the entire forestay until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by this, that is if he holds his hand under his nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the level of dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh is reborn and hardened the limbs, thus goes the matter to the nail;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are open all over, and it does not come to disturb the nose, nor diminish, so it is necessary that you read the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the sound, then apply ventouses or heating iron without piercing to suck, then put on the eye a linen cloth made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye, and apply a dressing with bandages and drapels;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the way of the dressings is that you take dressings fairly soft, and fold each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then hold steady by placing a hard bandage above, and reapply the cups to suck out the noxious matter that causes fermentation.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the cups and keep the eye steady day and night, and if the ligatures are too loose, it is necessary that you tighten them strongly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the ligature after day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it's good.
se ce non;	If not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reapply the plaster and the dressings and the ligature and the cups until he is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing of the web-like membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When cracks appear in the web-like membrane, then open, and issue forth like grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you have seen the copious flow, the operations are such that you insert a needle at the root of the affected part below, then insert another needle where it has the double filament from the part of the arm.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and have them pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then thread the double filament and tie a part of the tube around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place it on the same moistened eye in abundance of egg whites;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the threads dry with the egg whites, then heal the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and many times the wound is restrained by a circle of cloth, each part of it, until it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes have great appearance, if they pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuginous and descends to the eyes, and enters thus quickly;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not other than a swelling that is assembled in the eye, appearing like a serpent descending, and it's not a real serpent;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands from both parts, and move it so that you see the swelling come to the surface before your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then be still, and do not move, and hold the light steady, and see the patient's things as they normally are;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not move below, know that it's a real serpent, and the descent of the swelling is not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and touch the cornified web at the point where the conjunctiva continues with the cornified web and the cornea, until the swelling subsides;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is dislocated, if it is distilled into the sharp warm honey-like mixture at midnight, or warm or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	from the inflamations of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have already seen the similarities of the sharp points in the division, and this is what needs to be pierced;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if it opens according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy oil firmly and tightly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper of the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a ray in that whitish part of the eye at the lesser arm's joint, then apply the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so much until it pierces into the whitish part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the forefront of the measure of the space which is from the pruning up to the end of the blackness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the cornual membrane, and then place the instrument where the water is, then press it down one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation:
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After rest a little, and if the water rises the second way, place the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in water a small piece of gemstone, and lift up this eye from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by default the eye droplets or lane moistened with rose oil and abundant water, and bind with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Us, and those who are of our kind, put on common bruise with abundant water.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the maggots cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose shape is this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And prick then the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deep in the font, but make the subtle layer, then you apply alum, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient the Dormiteur approaching, in which he sleeps on his back in the darkened room;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be warned of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then disengage him in the same darkened house, and test his vision, and make him see no things, and then put him back in bed until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not suitable that you do this in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	abscesses come, which you dislocate before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is appeased, if you dislodge the vein and put on its face a little roll to cover any day, and so be then in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then exits from the house little by little, and converts into its cases;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and knows that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made ointment with almaga, which draws out water, but I never saw any of it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the likenesses of the forms of alumgada, because those who do not know them go astray;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let them be arranged properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And they are the head of water of this same subtlety, and the last in four angles aague.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	There never arise or are born various joined characters, so that there are some which seem like scorpions with many feet;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there is such a one where it has a flesh-colored encrusted chart, and if it has a soft bone-colored chart.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that case of those charts which is soft and not encrusted, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open their nostrils, and throw the onion at those charts, and treat them with fire;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then seize that which you can sustain in the subtle spatula on one side, as much as you know that this chart is completely ostensible.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open everything to the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and do not surge above it, or abscess bursts, if you drain it as it is fitting;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the blood is staunched and all the flesh is burnt, then pour in either oil or egg whites or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the egg whites do not work, and moisture reaches up to the palate, know that it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is a new flesh growing in the bone above, where the instruments cannot come to cut;
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then it is fitting that you put a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and sew with our hands, and have between each stitch of space a digit or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's head on a thread of his own nail to purify it, and treat with aromatic herbs until he breathes through his nose into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times they do so to the child as to schools, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold one head that comes through the nose to one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth to the other hand, and know one after the other in being thus, as we who are in a thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this as much as you know that the nuts have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian unguent, and put it back in the nose as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put or apply a poultice of warm plants for some days until it is healthy, and if it needs medicine treatments, then use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the shape of the instrument for cleansing the head, where they distill oils and medicines or apply them.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it is of silver or copper, resembling a covered lamp, like a cane, and the conduits thus.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, make a closed cane, and it is the plain instruments for cleansing the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and hold the handle to the head to keep it in place when one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease called "telul" nestles in the head, and grows and becomes large again, until it is seen clearly when looked at.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and therefore it is necessary that you cut into the bone at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then apply the cauterizing instrument or the burning medicine.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and one delays coping as long as it is great, if you take warning if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not let the iron touch more, for it is an enchanted abscess, because when one copes only once, great evil comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can cope with it all, if you look at the patient and their sense of fear, and cure the limb of things that are dry and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is touched and wounded
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when continuations of solutions come into one of these cartilaginous passages, it profits little, because in some homes.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is necessary then to make an incision when it has come to nothing, if you look at whether the wound is fresh in all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then adjust the two lips of a wound to a suture, then cure it until it is healthy;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrub all the parts of their heart until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a suture, and hold them in place, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and incense bruised.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another sudden plaster, and let it stick as long as it holds by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the bandage is that you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the bandage of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Many men have had deep abscesses in their limbs, similar to grains of veins, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then it is necessary that you turn the limbs, and divide into each node, and take them as pincers and cut into each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the oil after the incision of glassy pitch, until the wound is stained;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply the ointment of ash, and heal the limb of dry things as long as it becomes healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the decay of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times there is swelling on the gums where it is pressed, which the old people call "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	it is necessary that you hold them as in tongs, and cut to its root, and let the blood or sap flow.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then apply on the limb a vitriol ointment, or other drying and constricting powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if it returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut a second time, and cauterize.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	the filthinesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they gather at the head of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and often are the black and yellowish-green teeth, as far as the decay reaches the gum, and are the foul-smelling teeth;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	it is necessary that you hold the patient between your hands, and their head be in your sanctum, and take out the teeth or the scurfy scales, so that nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus make from the blackness and the greenness, and from the yellowness and other stains, so that they be worldly;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then start again on the second day and the third, until you have everything taken out;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that one extracts between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others are prepared with you equipped.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of his pain that you delay to handle it as much as you can, for one must not do it hastily.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance just up to then that one has no excuse to delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to undergo treatment, it is necessary that you be certain of the pain caused by the teeth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and believes it is in a sound tooth, and makes them handle the good tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and thus the pain does not depart from him for that, as long as the bad one is extracted, for we have already wanted to do it to these sound ones.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides, strongly to guard the gum from all parts.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then place your fingers or subtle pincers at the first little by little, so that it is well loosened, then you will firmly affix the pincers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the head of the patient be in its natural position between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part, and remove it as you did previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the teeth are pierced and gnawed, it is necessary that you fill them with cloths, where the perforations are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you hold it subtly in the tongs, so that it does not break while holding.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to work carefully around the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and reveal to the patient through the malice of the larger root more great pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act thus like the ignorant surgeon, who in their haste and hardness often break the instrument, and do not amend what we have recounted.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but often they come through the observation of this great illness due to the roots that remain, or through the instrument that they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is decayed, if you wash the jaw with wine or with axle-tree and elder;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and we remove blood that comes, which often happens, if you apply the jaw with vitriol paste;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if it does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the instruments, which one must use to extract teeth first, should be long and thin points and large handles, so they do not slip when you pull out the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the drawing, and let them be of iron well made, and let them be toothed to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the pulling, it is necessary that you put on the jaw a moistened cotton cloth in butter I or II, as long as the jaws are softened, then you apply the clamps called "algefri", from which the head seems to be in the shape of a bird's beak;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they are then made thus as a file and it is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to issue from all these tongs, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and you put the instrument which is called "althali", it is to know plainness, from which this is their form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break easily, and if its root grows through that, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, then aid yourself with all the instruments, from which the forms come here afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one aids with this instrument which has many grooves, from which it is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are presented in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pincers, from which it is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of these dense instruments are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are certain diseases where the ancients did not teach about instruments because of the diversity of wounds; and it does not break in the thick cartilage or other bones, or it putrefies, if they seek the instruments that they need, which I have told you, and aid with gestures, from which this form comes:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let it be thick and holding well to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but can hold and remove.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the limb with suitable medications for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and the form is ugly, and especially in young women, if it is necessary that you know that the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot make it straight or limber:
adonques lou raie;	then the root;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument which has the form, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be of iron pointed in the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the jaw closes little by little every day due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file a part of the tooth as it is in its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file with which one makes the needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and with a file or instrument he touches little by little and gently in many places, so that it does not move until it is straight.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the flat surface at the end has no roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth locks
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front tooth falls out, whether by shock or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it because they fear it will fall out, and you treat them with medicines that constrict, and that is not worth it.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	it is necessary to hold them together with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and decays, but the gold does not move at all.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you want to realign the teeth, take the thread and double wire between the two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you arrive at the sound tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then recommence the covering up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so that it does not move at all;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and be your ligature at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the heads of the thread to a small nail, and assemble them, and place them between the sound tooth, and set it so that it does not touch the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it constricted as much as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the threads break, hold it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it remains and serves thus all its tension, and it is the form of the teeth and the shape of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and of the two muscles, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, if you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not interfere with it, for those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the form of a tooth of ivory, and put it in its place where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and it remains and serves thus long tension.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of covering the lien of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never are these bonds that come from under the tongue or naturally, which you do not know thus.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accidental wound swelling;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then take the nervous cord as large, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is toughness or knot, and it is suddenly a wound, if you cut the uncinate and take as large the ligament.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and beware that the fissure is not too deep in front, because of the artery which is beneath.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done it, lift the level of warm water and of hazel, or of cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and tighten the patient's bandage every night, so that the wounds cannot suppurate.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize it with a slow-cautery fire, which is good for that.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then the treatment of another treatment as long as he is healthy,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see that it is of bad color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a cancer;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it declines to a whitish color, and there is moisture, then he throws in the onion, and makes a subtle spatula-like instrument, and delivers on one side and the other;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if you do not find it in your work, then put on a vitriol plaster as long as it is stained, then return to your work as much as you can treat everything fully;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the lever of vinegar and of seat, and the treatment of other treatments as long as he is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes there come into the throat bulges that are called "goiters", and they are properly called II swelling, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, take heed:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is abscesses hard of small sense and of false color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, also for the ornamentation of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let them be until they are ripe, and then you will divide them, or they would break apart by themselves;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color round, and the root is subtle, then prepare the instrument for covering, but first look to see if the abscesses are calm and at peace.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be in your healthy one, and open their mouth and take the surgeon's hands between theirs, and press the tongue underneath all the instrument, so that it is in the form.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or subtle iron, just as our cautery irons:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can't you press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and fix it in the handle, and pull strongly upwards more than you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and pull something from the tiles with, then shape it to the instrument, because of its form, which seems like a force;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all the tips are curved, and one end to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cover it with tongs, so that it takes its form.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let it be cutting on one side, and named on the other side;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have shaped one of the handles, shape the other according to the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, hot and gentle, and if there is evacuation of blood, gargle the patient warmly, or use scorched pomgranates that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stained;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then let the wound heal until it is healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and often no abscesses grow in the throat except the two glands, if they gather together thus like the two glands unite.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was nestled deep in her throat, to be known as the small abscess of sense;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and it had almost completely closed off her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so elevated there that it had poured out two loads through the two nostrils of her nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened then, and made an incision in one of the angles, then the flow of pus was released, and a large portion of bowel was freed.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I made another incision in the other passage of the nose, and I opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After I burned the anvil in these abscesses, and I cauterized a part of it, and only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And then the woman's throat became constricted, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscesses grew again, and filled the void that I had emptied, so much that it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I tricked her and cauterized inside her throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Then the swelling began to grow.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I left those areas, and only God knows what happened afterwards.
de l’uve	of the egg
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the humors descend to the vein, and it is inflamed and it is long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is very large and round, it is called a "vein".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit at all, and you see that the hot abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, so it is necessary that you grasp it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one that is rounded and assembled, and is not lengthy;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is blood-red or of a dark purple color or black, so it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned previously.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then prick the onion in the egg, and pull it from below, and grasp it with one of the two instruments that I have said for the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not remove more flesh than the excess which is beyond the natural terminus;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut more, it grieves at the voice, and at the speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two gums, and cure it until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear about operating, it is necessary that you use judgment in the cautery of the senses, for fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of burning with fire is sharp and bitter.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts his head in your healthy one, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cauterization, and confines it with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using the application of this instrument, because it is its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let there be on the head a lock of hair or where one puts the medicine, like the hairs of a comb, and put the instrument to all the medicine onto the wound;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient should be seated on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth to the medicine placed within, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the blister;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then put your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the eye, for a quantity of about half an hour, until you see the narcotics and the murmurations of the medicine are appeased;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the eye;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cauterization is perfected, then let it dry, and wait after three or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have mastery of reapplying the cauterization of the medicine, so reapply it, and after cauterizing, suck in the cotton soaked in borax, and clean what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be raised from cold water, and let it be cured of garglings as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, nor the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it there, and make it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot is well glued with strong earth, and in the pot has an instrument that is arranged in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be applied to the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the repeated recommendation, until the eye dries out, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of a hot abscess, for many things can happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make a fiercer fire than at the decline of an abscess's heat.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a candle and put in the patient's head a thread of egg white, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the egg white thread does not let the vapor pass into the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times one is hurt at the throat by a fishbone or some other thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance if he vomits the bitter thing
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	where the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and there is a thread on the sponge, and then it passes through;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the place, if it sticks, and then you will draw it forth;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out of what we have said, take the instrument of a probe in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all may come to harm, and do not push the bone within;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is necessary that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows when the thing is bitter;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If you burn with fire below, or if you pull it straight with all the instrument equally, so that it is straight.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the swelling of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No wound is medicated, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when it does not benefit at all, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, so draw it out completely with the small hook, or with subtle tenaculas that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that doesn't work, take a curved hook, and put it in the throat of the patient, then pull out with the curve of the hook the iron hot instrument, and make it often happen.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you touch the patient's aquiline all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and let it swallow in sense, and move it to its hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if soon the wound feels the water, it scabs.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not scab as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with assafetida, at the instrument that I said in the fumigation of the urine;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall sooner.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you take the pot where there are visible coals, and it should be covered with a pierced cover in the middle, and in that perforation should be the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then you throw in the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the sanity;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the sanity will fall now, and if it does not fall, then recommence the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then the liver will be cleansed by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument is where one treats the vein, it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs entering into the gorge;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has resemblance to a bird's beak, and it has roughness of a file, so that what it takes, it cannot release;
et vez ci la forme:	and see there the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two manners, one of which is in its own likeness, and according to what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is by the abscesses or where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the flesh are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the swelling is mild according to its accomplishment;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are on the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe on the outside, perhaps if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is on a main limb, and if you delay the perforation until it becomes ripe, it will not injure the main limb.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	where it is at the foundation, if you pierce it in this way so that it becomes mature;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not necessary that you pierce the abscess without complete digestion, unless it is at the foundation, so that it does not putrefy within, and becomes long and fistulous;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the debate and agreement of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make a seat for the perforation or more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens mouths;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the perforation be far from the long body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and veins and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no abundance.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases where they suffer, according to the affected limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the flesh, if it is worth more that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you make a hole before that, the body will be elongated from the venom of it, and is full of much foulness;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance they harden the lips and the depths of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limbs need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you make small abscesses, small holes;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large holes, and many fissures according to the likeness of the greatness of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the head, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has thus become jaundiced like I am wrapped, and is numbed, then one must do thus as they do for bubbles:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such ones that are split into three angles, and if there are such ones that one covers thus like the leaf of myrtle, thus like abscesses of the loins;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, thus like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has gathered great matter, and you pierce them, if you do not draw out all the matter at that hour, but rather draw out a part;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop the abscess just until the next day, then draw out nothing further there.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this many times with great effort, so much that the belly becomes entirely swollen.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old men who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the expert often kills the patient with the issue of the bowel, which by chance causes the death of the patient, and you do not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Examine carefully this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, suck out the pus, and look if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a plain ulcer, apply a dressing made of linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, then you should put a dressing in each one so that they do not touch each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, then you should fill it with old cotton or a dressing made from linen threads without moisture, and bind it just to the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and the treatment of the joint until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the shedding of blood occurs in your work, so apply cold and still water, and do not agitate the dressing, and place it on the wound, repeatedly cleaning it many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the blood circulation perseveres, they will receive good government and treatment, and the powders that I mentioned in my hands in this book, and if it is winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then it is necessary to apply tents and warm drapplings soaked in wine and hot oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is summer, and the limbs are weary, then it is necessary to apply warm drapplings soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then dissolve the abscess and the swelling and the treatment, as it is necessary, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to recognize universally in treatments of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	where you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of ulcers
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the blood comes from small abscesses, and there are ways of our own that are in tiles, just like the juice of a gall, and much is similar to it.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and such as those which have moisture, just like pores;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are ones that are hard and stone-like to the cutter, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the cutting are that you experience with every instrument that is called "intromission", because its shape comes from this, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then they feel it by probing above the loin.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is evacuated, it dries out completely, leaving behind no skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian oil, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, with water and wine, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and clean what has remained of the pus.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then replace the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that there remains no pus.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound of pricking at this suitable time, so it may be healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscesses hold in a thick humor, then cut according to this form, far from the loincloth.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and you scrape the ulcers, and remove the scabs from all parts, and put all your treatment of drawing forth the humor from the hip where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery does you harm in opposition, then do what I have told you to do afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And thus do for the abscess if it is porous, and on cutting and on healing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the porous and moist abscess, it is easier, for they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if there are none of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and it was one of these abscesses that I cut from the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess just like a sour, rough and white stone, and it could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had touched any of them, one would have made a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming to the head, because those that come to the head of children and roots of the ears, the opening should be made at the most dependent part, in order to issue the pus;
et les cure si com il covient.	and the treatment should be as it is suitable.
des scrophules	of the scabs
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Here is the translation:
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each swelling is properly inside its side, like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the similarities of these swellings are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one where you see good disposition in the touch, and it is similar in color to the body, and changes from each part and is not airy as nerves of the neck nor in the artery, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	it is suitable that you cut it from above, and scrape each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart as onions, if you are skilled in this, as we have said about abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and burn a little and slowly, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and are not too hasty with the scalpel, lest the hands falter, and do not see too far ahead, so you do not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to stop, then put into the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound still.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it be until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begin to puncture.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then seek with your finger if there remain small scripules, if you cut and mold them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrophula, it does not suit to cut that scrophula at its root, but rather tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall away by itself without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply the dressing of old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then the treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more superfluity because of the greatness of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of it, and draw out strongly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrophulae that hold a surplus, pierce them where they appear most tender;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce them thus as the one mentioned before, in a dependent manner, then I will treat them with ointment and similar things, so that they do not corrupt what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, then treat it with ointment inflamed with charcoal, until it be healthy.
de squinance	of bruising
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I did not see anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have a squint, it is necessary that the notch of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be examined;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one must not help by this, because all the veins and the arm of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the arm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut beneath three circles or four a small cut of the traverse, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the siphac, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and thus it is convenient for the section of the epiglottis that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are far from inquiry.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to the entire onion, then cuts the heart as far as it reaches the collarbone;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and clears the vessels of blood, if you do not see anything, and then touches the syphac, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the collarbone which jumps forth by the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leaves the wound open a little piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew all alone without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	One must not delay until the throat is entirely obstructed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and lacks breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then touches the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and therefore they command the old one to leave the open wound as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four And then they command to cauterize the wound and cure, until it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took the needle, and she stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the sinew of her arm;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, and I found her almost dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered, nor did a vein flow further than the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and cured it until she was healthy;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and I had not seen the young woman feverish when her voice was hoarse, and she returned afterwards to her usual disposition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I said that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This posteme is called " Hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	where nature has no point of obstruction.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which is similar to a fatty swelling, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not want to open or make fierce efforts except in the one that is small, and it proves and searches everywhere for the entire interior;
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus as I do not find fat, and it does not penetrate to any vein, if it bursts, if one bursts as we do, and it draws out all its filth, if there is any;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everywhere, and the doctor if it suits him, so that he may be perfectly healthy.
des nous	of the nouns
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of our own, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it suits that I say all the difference that is between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that the patient is feverish and tense, until the inflammation has passed, and the corruption is accomplished;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then replace the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new wound there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a abscess, and grows large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to their similarities, whether gray, or moist, and many colors are thus as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its shape will be or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of the nails is that you grasp or touch the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you feel that the struments have pierced the heart, then it is according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the suppurating matter, and take care in this that it bursts forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the running moisture is warm, whatever its color may be, thus do as I have said about the other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the suppurating matter has come out, know that it is fat, thus do it in a cross, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and turn the skin where it lies so that you draw it forth whole with the nail;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it forth whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if it stays nothing, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it stays a little, and the wound does not grieve, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing remedies for hot abscesses, and treat other wounds until they are healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat what injures flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the vein is beating against you or otherwise, then hasten and apply the liquid of broken vitriol, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to the treatment that was left undone from the beginning.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the forms of inward-turned instruments, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	big and mild and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three kinds that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	big, mild, and small, to encircle the abscesses of a fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one sews up wounds, and they are of citrin tin, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more proven for sewing up black pustules;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	big, mild, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the onions are very similar, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	big, mild, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if there are wounds that have three kinds of curvature thus;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are wounds that have three curvatures, and are thus of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are wounds that have two curvatures, and wounds with a single curvature only, and are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is where they are cutting, and of such there are those that do not cut except in one part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not touch the vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introductions are the swollen limbs placed in shackles, so that the patient does not perceive themselves at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not make more use of it than in the charcoal burned flesh, if like legs, and arms, and limbs, and fingers, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and one does not make another small instrument, similar to the scrapings of fistules, according to this form, where one stains blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the body that is connected to the gathering of veins, and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form;
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	One does not inflate the limbs of certain men when they begin to be corrupted, as much as they seem like feminine limbs;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain worn out and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to follow this form of this line, up to G:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicinal plaster in the open wound, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and cure until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the limb falls downwards, and is amazed by its greatness like they have in women, if it makes two ribs above, through two similar fractures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	of the one being held to the other at the end of the one and of the other, so that the larger line includes the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and prepare what we have said about bandages and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, so that it may be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it be until it eats away the remaining flesh and fat, then cure until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that form under the seats are kinds of hard scrofula sores where there are ribs, and if there is only moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture need to be treated according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire tumor that is in the abscess is evacuated, then fill the wound with much cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and cure by applying ointment to the extent that it becomes healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then they do as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound is open, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin that is above it is swollen, then many abscesses come from it, and just so does it happen to the inflamed and abscessed vein;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you recognize it by its signs as it is for the artery, then are the long abscesses deep in.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the strangeness;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, then are the veins devoid of apparent function;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to cover this abscess, and similarly when it is under the seats and in the corners and in the hollow of the shoulder and many other places, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and he who is at the head must choose also, and in he who is inflamed with arterial fire it makes a hole above the skin of the loin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then operate on the incision like a wound, and beautifully separate the artery from the tiles, until it is discovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then stick the needle underneath, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two eyes, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the abscess which is between the two lines of an introjected foreign body as much as the blood that comes out of it, and so be freed from the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then proceed with the treatment that soothes the bowel, until the swelling subsides;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal the wound of the eye socket, arriving at that, until it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is of the size of a vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then stick the needle underneath where you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you draw from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then touch the abscess, as I have told you, or bind one of the two parts with a thread as the head of the vein.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then I rebury another needle under all the thread beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut into the abscess until the superficies emerge, then cut into the superficial part of the heart and let what is bound go.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a dressing of soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply gentle treatments of poultices and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, how abscesses come into the arteries and veins, they come into the kidneys when they are fermented, or by too great a labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And it happens more often with joints and fingers in all places where there are joints, and this is the grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not at all in the deep part of the body, but beneath the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it must be well adjusted on all parts, and does not move forward or backward, neither below nor above, and the one that is in joints does not need to be strengthened with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	perhaps they will encounter contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or forehead, make the skin on the spatula-like.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, you hold them with pincers, and cut at their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, you suspend it with an onion, and scrape it, then bone and assemble the wound to the sutures, and treat until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of the large hanging lumps
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	It sometimes happens in the belly and not another part of the body, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by the resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw some that had II or belly wounds that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were split open, and immediately corroded with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found that one weighed 18 ounces, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you observe if the patient's moisture is moist, and the color of the joint is pale and moist and with a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if you touch the spatula to the large one, and be in its presence with the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when you cut too deeply, there often come great flows of blood, and if the wound does not close, then hasten to give a cauterization.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of the iron, take the well-made thread of steel, and bind the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then hold it back, and do not cease from constricting the thread of steel until it touches the artery, and cut through it without strain;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, you should fear to cope with them suddenly through the belly, but you can well cope with most of it, then cauterize so they do not return;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cure the wound, and beware that you do not touch the ulcer that is of foul color and of poor sense and of lazy regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or fracture of the syphac, and it is on the belly and in some of the bouez, just as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and it is through the rupture of the skin and the issuing of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses on it with their fingers if it recedes, and then returns, and by chance if it is constricted, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, it does not constrain at all;
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the toucher, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter about abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be straightened out entirely, then sign from the navel all around the abdomen.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then command him to sit between your hands, then go into the place that you have signed to all the spatula-like, then is the majority of the abscess above all the large groin.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind him with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk, firmly, and be the nails that hold the dislocated limb.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open the majority of the abscess extended on the limb, and you thrust your index finger, and seek the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find the limb taken by the dislocation, so dislocate it, and thrust the intestine to the depth of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowel, take it by the navel, and cut off the superfluity.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery does contrary, or the vein, then go gently inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and thrust two strong threads, and thrust the two needles into what you have done in a cross that you make pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the limb relax as much as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you find it when it is subtle and porous, then heal what needs to be healed, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs to be healed, and sew the limb.
dou chancre	because of a tumor
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken in the division about the similarities of cancer, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment with iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and say that cancer is engendered in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in the limb or where one can reach it if it is like cancer which is in the breasts, and in the hips, and in similar places, and it must be entirely removed when it is in its beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, you must not approach it, for I do not know how to heal any of them;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	I never healed any of them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the treatments, when it is in its place or where you can open it, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile several times;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him healthier if he has shown repletion, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the treatment;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then cut your onions or cancels, and shave all parts, and scrape all parts without leaving anything;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or anything, and if the blood flows back to you in opposition to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stanched;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of another treatment until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the water is done, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment which is done by medications, and that which is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is suddenly inflamed;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch with iron in these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympanitis and hipsarca, for it is deadly things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" with medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, if you see that the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as a tumor and solution of stomach and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if one should not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient has a strong vitality, and he has no other illness but only dropsy, and it is not too young nor too old, then you should operate thusly:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lift the patient's right hand on your hands, and the assistants press the belly in bulging out the water at the lowest part of the thigh, then take the spine scraper in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	to a point, and so that it is not inserted too far in that it can come just up to the intestine when one fixes it in, and does not make it burst;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then see if the dropsy is advancing towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you make an incision below the belly, and you must direct the needle right down to the groin;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the belly;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is because of weakness, let it be to the right, and it does not seem that the patient should lean on the crack that the excesses do not run to the weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and prick, and lift your hand at all the spatium between the skin and the underlying flesh, as if scraping out the quantity of an ounce or so;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the underlying flesh until the spatium reaches the empty space, and it is the veins of the water, then pull strongly, and you prick this instrument according to its shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a subtle silver tube, and it is of silver or lighter arching, and has at the back part a small hole;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and where it is narrowed on one side, it has three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and one from another part, and one from another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut like a quill, and it's the shape of the incision that the writers cut with the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top is the scalpel, so that when the instruments come to the water, they descend now onto the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty the quarter or third part, for if you empty more than it is necessary at that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit of the arm, or he falls faint, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then pull the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the cord that stops up the passage which is on the syphac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then recommend the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do nothing for a day, and keep him from moving too much but only a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and you let him have much water, if the treatment of the grave wound or sore is hot, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and refrain from drinking.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment with drying medicines so that it be healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the stopping of the flow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never is a child born who does not have smallpox on the rod, or the smallpox is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If you want to make it so that it does not perceive at all the spatiumile, a very subtle mole according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	Then put or insert a subtle cloth of fleece, and bind it thus for three days or four and when he wants to make urine, let the cloth be removed, and make him urinate, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance it does not converge at all points, for the urine that comes out does not allow it to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	This is where the perforation is small, if it is medicated with a cloth of cotton, as we have said, it will enlarge itself.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the hole in their back are blocked, for none are born with a hole at the head of the penis, because they cannot urinate before lifting their penis up high;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come up to the marrow, and it's a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the surgery is that the patients place themselves thus on their back, then they hold the head of the penis and the cope as wide as a penny, so that the hole appears in the middle, just as it converges;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of the flow of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then staunch what is bleeding blood, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the blisters on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times they come to this bath, and it is a false appearance of a wounded hand;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	it is necessary that you take them with the subtle onion, and clean and wash all, then put on cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with ointment diafinicon until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, it is necessary that you apply fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cleaned it, and the bath is in a state of putrefaction, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the bath that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is soothed, then heal what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat them together, it is not assured that the head of the wound will not be perceived, and there comes darkness and corruption in the wound and in its junction;
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a flow of blood comes, then apply the lunar cautery in this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery fires help with these two conditions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	it is to know, at the flowing of blood, and to the corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the rod is corrupted and withdrawn, then you should push or lead the rod with a hollow cane, and urinate for the patient within;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin is attached to the head of the rod which has affected those who have not been circumcised, or it has happened due to a wound or an abscess, then you should scrub it with a sharp instrument, so that the threads are disentangled, and the head of the rod is freed from all parts;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then you should scrub it with a spatula at no point near the head of the rod and the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then separate it thoroughly between the two, and put the subtle layer of the millstone in a cold frog, so that it does not become stiff again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Surgery is not one of the continuous remedies like the other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Always when we make this work of our will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not practice circumcision on their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the greatest part of my masters and healers who performed circumcision on the thigh, and with force, and at all novelty;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if it happens that the courses are there because they have two tolls, and by chance if one covers the upper part and delays the lower.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Now it receives a covering, and the pain is double, and at the purification which is given from there, it is not assured of the point of the limb;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and for the purification of the nail by chance scratching the iron, and correcting the joint, and often they are born thus that they have no need of purification and I have wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mending which is done with force all along the thread of the vein I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly on the whole sole beneath;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but let the thread be well stretched around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him do more than to tie the thread around the rod as gently, and then you make it slide in all the ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then you make it stand upright between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or beneath your feet so that the veins do not see them, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand on the rod and blow or heat, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then thoroughly clean the area of the wound which has been assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie underneath and attach to another thread.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it with the second thread at the pouch and at the index finger, and wrap between the two threads, then lift the cord above hastily and pull the head of the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the remedy;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and on the powder I drizzle glue made from a cooked egg yolk mixed with rose water, congealed with rose oil that is good and fresh, and let it sit until the next day, and treat with another treatment until he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The shape of the bandages for the wound is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two heads should be even and should be equal, and the heads should also be as large as the equally balanced handle:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of the mundification is when the dead heart falls to the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the liquids make an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and equal coating, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, if you have tenaculum, and then the coating.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they surpass three days, and what is beneath the rod is inflamed, let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and the scab falls off lightly;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if you cover it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Healing then the wound of sudden blows with powder, which we have said to treat with powders, and if you cover beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm at all.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
dou retenement de l’urine	due to retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or from congealed blood, or from a blow, or from a new wound, or from similar things, which we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine does not flow, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is there or in the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent over their knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and they should place their feet on the back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part above the back, and the patient should strain to alleviate themselves as much as they can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure of the stone from above, because of which the urine does not flow;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer the extraction with all the instruments which are called "syringe", of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and be of subtle silver threads lightly woven, like the feather of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let it be the length of a palm and a half, and subtly at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of releasing the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head with a point of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and remove the superfluous length of the wool and cut it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist olive oil and water tided;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod downwards towards the bowel;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then apply the syringe before it reaches the bladder, and let the patient feel it reach the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless the conductor or she who was led astray.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread throughout the entire lane little by little, and the urine follows the lane, then it is extracted further, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And restart the syringe until the bladder is empty, and alleviate the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of bladder diseases
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, where putrefaction is assembled, and you see distilling waters and medicines, if you do all the instrument called "clyster", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if there are three punctures:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the veins are sought out by which the medicine can be inserted in such a way that it stops the bleeding well, if one can then draw out the moisture, and apply as much as is necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see gathering your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cauterizer in the moisture, and pull out the pulling which is inside;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you pull out the moisture to the cauterizer, and then strongly pull back the pulling thing inside;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture enters inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and it is the shape of a subtleclyster which one uses to cleanse the bladder:
si est ci:	if it is so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or copper, and its head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below that the vein or the sinewy part;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you see to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a twisted double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then put the head of the scalpel in the orifice, then hold your hand on the bladder at all the moisture that comes, so that the patient feels that this moisture has already come to the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly all around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then put the strong thread through these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as if you had done with the bladder, to press with your hand so that the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already said in the division the ways of piercing, and the extraction together with medicines.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have said the difference between the piercing in the groin as wounds, and all the signs, and in what piercing one should operate with regard to size.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the rod;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is born in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it appears there, and touches the patient's rod, and it bites many times, and then becomes rigid;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at much of these jumps the foundations;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and it is easy the healing of children until they are 4 years old, and it is much grievous in old people, and it is as youthful moisture, to those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and it is the cure easier for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to calm the patient by whispering, in order to expel all the bad humors that are in his intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders the quest to pierce the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and push and move upwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and jumps out many times from the high place;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then touch the spine and inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall to the toucher of the whole, anoint your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is weak, or your left finger, if the patient is young and complete.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and thrust it into its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, anoint it at the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press on it with your finger, and thrust it to the depth where you saw fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand remove the skin which is beneath the loins in the part where the cut is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then he applies the spatula-like instrument, because this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And makes an incision between what is between the hip and the perineum, not in the middle but at the side of the left nostril;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight on the stone, and the two should be thus or in the perineum, and the cutting should be so that it is wide by default, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	perhaps the pressure if the two that are in the perineum, so that they jump out of their sense of labor;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is some stone where it has angles, and margins:
si est griés a issir;	if it is difficult to remove;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is some that is underneath, resembling a pebble, and round, whose removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Where there are corners and edges, make the cut larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and it does not jump, so it is necessary that you stretch over the tendons which are like a file on the head, to stretch the stone so it doesn't escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	where you apply underneath the subtle, curved instrument at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the little hole, and if the sense is deceived, then stretch with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stone, then apply the largest first to the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull out fiercely, and the small ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it requires more careful treatment, and causes greater harm.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For these things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	where he dies, or the urine comes immediately because the bladder cannot hold it;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but you must force yourself to handle it, or to remove the tendons, as far as you can treat them piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put over it a dressing moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then resolve the patient back onto their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, rub in the oil and water very well, then apply the ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this means that the urine cannot pass, which is known in such a manner without passing with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of serum, and aid him in all the ways that you know, so that he may be healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, that you bind the two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the treatment of those things that I speak of thus, that you cut many times, is an excuse for the cutting through this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a rod of iron in this form and it will be at three angled points fixed in the thigh.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take the thread and tie it around the rod below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then push the iron into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the iron with your hand on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If the urine comes too soon, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone that is within the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it breaks suddenly, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this because of anything that bothers him, then thread the filament beneath the stone and another above, then make the penis in the place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract it outward, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until he is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It rarely happens that a stone forms in women, and if it does happen, the treatment is grievous, and is hindered by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-acquainted with her own body, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth manner is that the stones of the woman are deeper than those of the man, because it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear in this. And if you need to ascend to this, it is necessary that you take a wise midwife, and hold the true faith on, and if you do not find one, then ask for a subtle cast;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And it presents a wise midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and she is commanded to do what you command her regarding the examination of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to thrust her finger or foundation and search for the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and it heals, if the swelling goes down under his hand, and he recommends that he puts his hand or with the patient, and wants and presses his left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	It heals, if it is necessary to move it gently from the entrance of the bladder downwards, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft flesh, where it is badly arranged, and feel the stone in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his finger on the stone or below, and let the cutting be at the first small size;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then put the instrument in the incision, if you feel the stone and it grows into the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	it is to know, small and large and bitter and sweet, long and round, and which have roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the symptoms to recognize the disorder.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the saneness fails, then put on the glass vitriol ointment, and hold it in place for an hour until the saneness is established;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is broken, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as men who will help you in your operation;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the saneness fails, and it is of the artery that is cut, then put the powder on the wound and hold tight with tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die;
puis cure la plaie.	then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the limbs are at rest, so return to your work, until the stone is firm.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Ramice aquose is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white pus, which is beneath the skin of the thighs, that contains the egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly on the web of the uvea, if one believes that it is another eye;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it's the skin of the conjunctiva between the white syfac that we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and they did not have a small pouch.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this remedy is from a weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from a blow on the conjunctiva, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	where it's a declining yellow color, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, because if it's white syfac that we have mentioned, then it's the red abscesses, a little long as the figure of an eye, and doesn't open the conjunctiva, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own web, then it's the red abscesses with part of the uvea, and therefore one thinks that it's another eye;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the groin and the white siphac, it feels all right;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you want to know the color of the moisture, it is experienced by the entire introjective quarter, because its form is thus presented.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, judge from what comes after the internal quarter, of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to their power and the replenishment of their body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then he puts it on his back, on a thing a little high, and places under him many folds;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then he sits on his left, and instructs the minister to sit on the right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart near the groin;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the groin between the loin down to the little finger, and make your incision quite straight in dividing the skin of the groin up to the white siphac, and carefully scrape according to their power;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the swollen area with a needle full of water, and extract all the water, then put on your onion-like poultices, and the swollen area will subside afterwards.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the core of the wounds, but let the swelling soothe itself;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	take all or piece by piece the subtle tissue of it gently, so that if you do not take it well carefully, the swelling will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the swelling has gone for a time, then reset it in its place when you have accomplished the work of the swollen area;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then assemble the two lips of the wound at a seam, then heal it as with other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the swelling corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cauterize the entire circumference, and extract the humor, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if it is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	cauterize the other part just as you did the first one equally, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a lint soaked in rose oil;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another lint soaked in wine and oil, and put on the two circumferences, and put double wrapping cloths on top, and bind it all together with a ligature that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and fill them with lint dressing according to this similarity and are assembled by stitching into the girdle of the arms, and one of the hands takes hold at the bottom just up to the back, and the other at the part of the thigh;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two heads on the two angles, and so the entire assembly is restrained in the loop of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and no time is medicine better than the fire cautery at the height of iron, and it is that you take the subtle cautery scalpel, and scrape the skin of the joints, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap which contains the water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that sap as with onions, and scrape it with this subtle hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And you scrape in all the ways that you can, until you uncover everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and beware that the cautery iron does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more salvageable;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and beware of the deterioration of blood, and dread the operations of iron;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing does contrary, or abscess bursts or blood flows out or something else, if you heal what makes it contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, then make a small perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs we have said that the watery fluid is there, then seat the patient on a high-backed chair;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then prick the abscess at the lowest part beneath all the spatula-like tissue, and put the perforation two finger-lengths from the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the pores be wide, so that all the watery fluid flows out freely;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remaining watery fluid flow out, then heal it until the wound is healthy;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and he should not let the white cloth issue forth from the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you apply a pen or instrument by which one draws out the water of the hydrops, whose form is thus before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarges the wound, and knows that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or soon afterwards, and when it is assembled thus before, and then the patient will spend his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Knows that in the treatment of this arm there is fear in more than one disposition, because it seems to me that many are worth more than leaving it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come to a head, and likewise are burned.
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive anger and anguish, which is expanded as wounds, or of percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not find a point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance it is a grievous abscess, painful and piercing, and of a dark color, and often comes from inflammation of an artery, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from inflammation of an artery, it is known by the disposition of hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not matter if you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is made from swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of touching with the fingers, and one can well make the measurement according to this resemblance, and on other symptoms;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you take the care of the wounds, then establish the egg white above, and remove the excess of the white skin, and deliver the suspensor from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already mixed with these new flesh, then it is necessary that you treat the egg, and take care of it;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is on the skin, or in that which is inside the veins, then it is necessary that you deliver all this tension, and take care of it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the humor, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are accomplished, apply the poultice of mild lime oil and rose oil, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	These are abscesses wrapped in a wrapping similar to a poultice, with the softening of the wounds, and the patient's grievance increases greatly when it is seen;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this disease is very close to the fearful one that was before, and in every way we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then place the suspension of the joints below his two buttocks, near all the vessels that are close to the penis, and you tie the masters, and stretch them out forcibly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut to the spatula, trenchant large and traverse the area of the vessels, until they are discovered, and then strip away from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then fix a needle or where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint or where the vein was visible, and tie it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt humors.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heal the wound as with others or by enlarging the opening, so that no vessel bleeds that nourishes one of the joints.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because for this reason there is no point of evil, and if all the veins are visible, it is necessary to treat the joints on all the veins;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their adjustment by the incision of the veins, and they should be steady and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of the Syphac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The circumstances of this fracture are by the section that comes from the Syfac, or the extension onto the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the joints;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this route is either from the Syfac, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a heavy load, and by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the Syfac, are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is the abscesses equal as far as the ulcer, because the swelling presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which brings sudden severe pain at its beginning, and they are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's decay due to the swelling.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends beneath the ribs with the intestine, and is held back, and causes great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron with fear, because he thinks of escaping from it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to hold their intestine in their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then let it be sewn up on its neck between your hands, and lift the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then place the heart above, and cut all the skin of the joints down to the long part;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then thrust inside the leaves of the waist uncinated according to what you have need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrub off the swelling that is beneath the skin of the joints, so that the hard white swelling may be uncovered on all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then put your finger index in that which follows the joint, in that which is between the white swelling that is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second swelling, and separate that which is behind the vein, and between the second swelling;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then put the right hand inside the curve of the loins, and extend the white cloth upwards to the left hand, and lift the vein towards the entire waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to extend the vein upwards, and detach what is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and examine your fingers if there is a point of intestine wrapped around or hard white cloth, and if you find nothing, then thrust it into the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with a large thread made of X threads, and thrust it into the rear part of the vein, which is behind the skin of the loins;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	behind the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and bind the vein, which we have said is behind the skin of the loins, with a strong ligature of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the heads of the veins, and bind them in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them cannot enter within, so that abscesses do not grow there.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put a ligature according to the first ligature a long way from that one, and after these two ligatures leave enough space which is beneath the heart of the conjoined fingers, the width of a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and afterwards all the others according to the roundness that the egg carries.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut into the part that is beneath the skin of the fingers, until the blood flows, and the swelling, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then mix the millet flour in oil, and put it on the wounds, and I will mix the ligature that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is it cauterized with a thread as we have said, after the incision, by fear of deterioration of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leave the ligature until it sticks by itself.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays at the wound, let it be raised with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done as the antimony which is assembled at the seam of the vein, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting lightly underneath;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut into the middle, and treat the abscess of what is swollen, until the vessels heal;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and opens the muscles;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not descend to any of the intestines as coils, and if they descend, it is little, and repair all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and whenever it stays too long at this point, if he believes the wound or syphilis, so much that the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the swollen face which is like a nut, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and inflates the eyes and opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and it is never cured by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then holds the arm of the affected limb inflated according to the quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the swelling that is beneath the skin where it hurts, then take the rod and place it on the arm appearing swollen;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press at the deepest part of the belly, then cut the two appearing eyes of the swelling on the head of the rod, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the vein, and do not touch the spot where the blood does not spread to another area, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of intestinal ulcers.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then heal by healing the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if it is mended and the wound is cured, so that it may be healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is constricted, and has no appearance in the rut, and the cauteries are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times are softened the skin of the joints in some men, because the flesh that is within them is softened, and it is easy to see.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, that one makes the patient sit up straight, and covers the skin that is softened on the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring the two lips together to a seam, and if you see, first remove the excess of the softened skin at three seams or four firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cover between the seams, and heal it as with other wounds, until it be sound, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	of punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that cauterizations are recommended in our law, and therefore I would prefer not to speak of them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary to discuss them for they can be done in two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	where one is that the masters respond in writing when one demands it, and in writing the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often have need of cauterization of certain beasts to help us, such as goat and sheep and deer and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that cauterizations are done according to two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water, until its hide is softened and relaxed;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them with your hand, until they are restored and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the treatment of wounds:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you hold the best, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then lift the suspensor, and sew on each bone to the cop, when you have well excavated them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and let none of the thick skin and the subtle skin that is above the veins;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of treatment is better than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction something of the joints often remains, for which reason the best desires luxury;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then heal the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	and the hemorrhoids
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphrodite is according to two manners of men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is that between the two joints appears as if the figure of a woman's nature, where there are hairs, and sometimes it cuts off the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another manner is in women, and it has on the little finger as a rod and they bind.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the wound and the fame is that you should clean all the adjacent areas, and treat them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, of men whose urine passes through the skin of their thighs, if there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tendonitis
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigen is an adjacent area on the natural part, so much that it is too shameful to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tentigen from your hand or from the onions, and clean it lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not rub too much in depth, lest corrupted blood comes, then the treatment of another wound as long as it is healthy;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and to another sore that grows at the mouth of the marrow, and the putrid matter, and by chance it bursts forth, and it is according to the resemblance of a cowe, and for this reason the old people called it "cowe disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary that you take it, as we have said about the tenderness, and the treatment until it is healthy.
de erratique	of burnings
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Error occurs when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the pertussis is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural from birth, or it happens by accident due to a disease that came about;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is by chance encounter, or subtle douleur or thick, and it is made deep in the marrow, or in the ribs, or beneath, or whatever it may be;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and they hinder conception, and childhood, and by chance they have flowers to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is through the observation of the patient's pulse.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppings are nearly apparent, then seek at your fingers or in the vein.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a subtle douleur and it is close to the liver, if you hurry, and the roundness then:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	place your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then the two livers are formed, so that the subtle douleur is round, and it is above the swellings;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take the thread, and the vein in oil, and place it on the limb, and instruct the woman to stay at home each day, so that she cannot strain.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the skin is hard and thick, it is necessary to take the cupping glasses similar to a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the swelling is from newborn flesh, then suspend it from the hook and the scalpel;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and there are stain-releasing medicines of blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and ensemble of abundant egg whites;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a bandage of wide plaster, so that the wound cannot strain;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and let it be for a long time, and apply a dressing of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be cured by other treatments until he is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when new flesh comes in the marrow, it is necessary to apply a cup according to this method, if there are no swollen abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is swollen in the marrow, one should not touch it with iron.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Embrocations are openings of veins where there is no crust forming, and when the embrocations are old, they become thin.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have already said in the division the similarities of those, and the signs, and I will tell you here those that receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the thigh, when they are deep in the marrow, and they do not appear to sensation, if it is not the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, afterwards stretch out the tendons as tentacles, and cover with its roots, then powder with medicines restricting blood flow, such as aloe and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her in cold air;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if blood comes out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and peel of green apples and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster to apply on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stagnates, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, have her wear loose garments on her back and arms without constriction;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take a linen cloth, and soak it in juice of plantain or juice of angelica with old wine, and make it adhere to the limb.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess breaks, then clean the limb of putrid matter until it is healthy;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough scalp, so it must be covered as I have said in the thesis;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then clean it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the chest
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come to the marrow, such as cancer and pierous abscess and herpes and estoimenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary therefore that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscesses are agitated at the beginning of their coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make me ure so long as the pain is appeased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have small stools or he leans against them, and supports himself on his back and brings his feet together in parts to reduce the swelling of the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his knees be expanded, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a band of linen;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then suck the swelling towards the right side, and I will show you the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the form;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you have seen how to handle this instrument, you fix the rod first in order to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not go further in than it should, and it does not harm the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the swelling is larger, it is necessary to cover the deepness of the marrow of the torn tendons, so that the swelling does not bother them;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary to put the point of the instrument above, and to hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses open, and one feels it with the hand, if it is necessary to cover at the head, with a spatula, lightly.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the wound is empty, it is necessary that you put into the wound tender moistures in rose oil, or in dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the tender force of the wound at the depth of the marrow, and put below the marrow and on the wounded vein a nettle moisture in water or evil beak thus they are cured.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal afterwards for two days of anointing, coming to this, so that it may be healthy.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and at no time lift the marrow and the wound by injection of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and a long aristology should be applied;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then reapply to the joint.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is set in the marrow, it is necessary to beware of cauterizing with iron, but rather heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is better first to consider the natural formation of the child and the signs are when you see the woman approaching below, and desire to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then hasten the children to issue forth;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then know that this child's birth is according to natural formation, and it is the issue under its head, and the second one with him;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, you must gently press his belly, so that the child issues forth quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends upon its head, the second one is with him, and the marrow of his superfluous parts is purified by good mundification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes against the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or above, and is converted by an accident on its neck, and by other bad postures;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	it is necessary at the handling that it be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the infant comes upon its head by natural means, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the one is feeble, then make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and raise its natural oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the handling between its two little spatula-like tools which are its form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and anoint the second one, and apply to his finger as much as the moisture that is there corrects the fires;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and bind the belly of the woman so that the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with a mixture of fenugrec with oil of sesamum;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her take and absorb a concoction, and hold her mouth and nostrils for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if the children are now strangled.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands issue forth fire, it is necessary that you reset them lightly little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then rock the seat on the ground, and hold onto the woman, so that she does not fall at the rocking;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if he cannot put his hand in, and the infant dies, if he catches the hands at the counter which is placed beforehand, and extracts the child, and resets equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, if it is necessary to cast upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps just to the knees, if he commands to grasp, and makes it straighten with condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps far, God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump far as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come far as we have said, take a mixture of high water, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush all in the mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put it on the nature of the woman inside and drive out this anointing, then make her sit in warm water until beneath the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is softened below, have him make a collar of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have him sit on the chair, then have him straighten up and hold his mouth and nose, and take a light hold of his belly, for he will now faint.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the exit of the child onto its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the faintness comes in this form, then you put your hands on his belly little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then he should be supported on his neck, and his feet should hang down, and he should be laid out on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands little by little, and then take hold of his hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from below, until he is laid out downwards;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the faintness does not leave him, take his feet and move them gently, then move his belly upwards, then he will recover from your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and warm the little child gradually;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to take hold of it as much as the infant sucks.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the exit of the child who comes out with a wide hand meanwhile
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	You must skillfully bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if you cannot bring it back, lift the woman up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, make her sit on the bed, and bend her legs forcefully;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then treat the muscle strain that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she is not inflamed, make her sit on a chair, then study how to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and warm the infant according to its natural shape, and make it straighten out, and instruct it to take hold as much as the infant sucks strongly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the release of the child on its neck, and it has expanded its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	You must skillfully guide its hand, then turn it little by little, and warm it lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, then place on its natural muscle tone of the high and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, then make him sit on the seat, and instruct him to take hold;
et la fai esternuer.	and make him stretch out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the secondary ones
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it returns to this manner entirely the second time, then touch the second [joint] with your finger, as long as the moisture is evacuated;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it falls upon his face and neck, then touch the swelling, so that it is not retained, and soothe the boy;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as long as you have placed him as it should be, and instruct the woman to take hold at no time;
adonques si istra legierement.	then it will be easier afterwards.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that a gem grows many times, and sometimes three or four grow at once.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and it is not a strange thing, and it happens little.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live, if little known;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the bud;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they issue naturally like all those under, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue grievously, thus the cure as we have said, and let the subtle balm be, and make it thick and light, what it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as it is worth more to health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the balm knows all this, for by chance similar things have happened.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	do thus according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman with a dead fetus or in the womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by manual operation;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her thighs be inclined downwards, and her legs be raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife holds the two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart by the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then anoint the mouth of the womb with oily moistures made from walnut and fenugreek and flaxseed, then oil the bath with these oils and these anointments;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then put the buttons in the marrow lightly, then seek the place where they put the onions that are suitable for this, and take care that the veins appear to be prepared to descend to their head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if you place the onions in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the ribs, and if the descents are on foot, hold them or prick them and the sides of the month;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that you hold the onion in your right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of your left hand, and lightly touch all of your hand, and place the onion in none of these places that we have said, until it comes to the evacuated thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and that is the shape of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then place against another onion, or the third where you have mastery, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then it is set evenly by moving from one side to the other, so that it comes out straight, and let the edges of the teeth be for holding, as this is the form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if it remains in one part, oil the bail with some of its fingers, and put them in that part, and treat the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it does not remain at all, put this edge or higher up, and do this until it issues forth completely free.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to stiffness, then you must wrap around the drapil, until it issues forth completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then cup the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus you must do with the other hand, and with the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the infant is large and it is constricted at birth, or it has an assembled stiff neck, then you must put the spinous spatula between your two, and make the head and extract the stiffness.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you apply the instrument called "almidach", which is one of the instruments or surgical tools that come after this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus it makes the veins naturally have a great natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then treat the bones like tenons, and the head jumps forward and holds onto the strength, if it is fractured, as long as the moisture that is or worse comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces in the muscle where you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on its feet, then it is light attraction, and the remedies at the mouth of the marrow are lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is strained in the belly or in the thigh, then it is necessary that you extract it with the drapil enveloped around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make an incision in the belly or thigh, until the moisture that is there flows;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other members are numb, and the head remains still, then he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just up to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then he applies the ninth or tenth, and draws it strongly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by hot abscess that has come, then it does not need to be worked, but rather to be treated with moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the treatment is with plasters, and they should be in watery, softening, and moisturizing (applications).
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it upright, then treat it with what we have said regarding the living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and so that one cannot obtain power, if one draws strongly by sections, and does not leave anything of the secondary (affected area).
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, remind him of what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood flows out, let it be put into warm water, and remind him of other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long tension the wind came into the belly, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to great portent.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long tension, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong plaster of attraction, and an bone came out, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, because it seemed that the belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I touched the wound, and I treated it with my hands, until the woman was at her best point;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I watched over the woman for a long time afterwards, and then I gave her a little drink of good wine.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I did not forget this chapter because of that which, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one examines the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and it has two turnings as it has two heads of the veins.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle on the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the tube be wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and from a palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the middle of the two limbs should be the adjustments of this same tube, which are fastened at one end and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and this adjustment is placed in the mouth of the clamp to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, in its more subtle and lighter likeness, should be made from ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the pincers.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and have two heads with two adjustments, as you see, a palm in length, and two widths;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you want to open the clamp with all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet pendant and her legs covered, then place the two adjustments assembled in the clamp, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then open your hand to the entire instrument, as you have done with the even tendons, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marrow, until the boil does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all elevated, and their similarities are multiplied there;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the mirrors have appeared to them, so much more swift is the work, and higher are the bones among them according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in infancy, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his wing, and then make him stretch out his condition, and hold your hands on the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let him jump through that, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take the poultice, and make a perforation or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calmant, rue, anise, chamomile, sassafras, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or put in water on the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a cane or tube into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and hold it as long as the vapors come out from the patient;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary symptom appears quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not get better, instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or musk, and then put it in the nostril, and desire the second one;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when they have found it, take hold of it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the patient does not feel extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw it out;
si venra et se desaerdra.	If he comes and dislocates himself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the thigh is already constricted, we have described the treatment of sternutation, and of fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not from all that we have said, beware that you do not fall into error in treating;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the thigh, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then anoint it with a four-drug ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if it will putrefy and suppurate, and come to a crisis;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when it putrefies thus, there comes bad smell from the stomach and head, and blinds the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	It is necessary therefore to use soothing fumigations for that:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument by which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to make similar to a dog, and place the subtle head in nature, and the large heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tar until it is roasted, and recommence another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus the aid has been subtly stopped:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	it is necessary then to give to the patient who perceives it thus with his finger, and does not touch the spatula with the ague, and arrange the bandage so that it does not touch;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on the affected limb a mixture of wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not rest, then put or insert a piece of lead, and leave it there for days, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And often these stoppings come suddenly from a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	it is necessary to cover that sudden one:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it be cured, as we have said about the falling of the spleen.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodes, and those that come from beneath the deep foundation are furrows, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that node is ancient, it opens, and gathers moisture in a whitish or subtle swelling, and at no time are these fistulas persistent;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known by the fact that there is a flow or flatulence when the patient makes an effort to eject, and sometimes suddenly jumps upwards.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the hip.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula by its foundation, and it does not hide.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your indexed finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or copper into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horse hair, until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from bad pertussis or evacuation or twisting or vermin, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce badly;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close to the bladder or near the urinary tract, if it affects the urine, and cannot be soothed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just up to the joint of the thigh, then the probe comes just to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the origin of the pain is within, then it is that it is immediately swollen, and no medicine or sudden movement by anointing is of value;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure unless one works hard, and vanity of foolish doctors who get involved.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he lifts his legs up to his knees, and has his knees bent towards his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then apply a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it in the foundation, then it is necessary that you apply your right index finger, and afterwards it seems that the tent has penetrated;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and be discovered where you feel between your fingers the swelling or the flesh, then know that it is persistent;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work carefully, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can hardly ever fully heal some wounds, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and the entire hot iron is in the fistula, until it reaches the bottom;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these burned scars are dry, which resemble a bird's claw;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat the moist wounds with powder, until those scars are dry, then treat them with ointment, soothing and drying.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, no other way can it be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and it holds within, and does not penetrate just to the finger that is at the bottom, and between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at what follows the covering of the hollow gut;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If you cauterize at the beginning of the fistula, and cut beforehand beneath the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be freed, and will fall;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then I will define those withered branches that seem a bird's wing, and none of them will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you feel faint, and shorten between you and the vein, then cautery with fire or medicine is necessary.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cauteries assemble two bone things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	it is to know, the dryness of those withered branches, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of wet tents in mud or in broken wood, until the juices flow out, and it makes the withered branches dry in the mud;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the swollen fingers by applying dry charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	Because when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes almost to the font of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then cut off your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between there is the cloth or the suture or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you cauterize as we have said, or you sew just to the foundations, or if you can put tente and cure as at first;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep in the foundation, so you do not sew the holding that holds the foundation, and come to the gestures through the voluntary sense;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the cure, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the world then it is sewn from the deep foundation, or by tente or by another appointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then define that faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the weakened part at the foundation:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And often are fistulas in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is or costs the depth of the foundation beneath the skin above, if you take a perforated tent at the head in this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push the twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	It is piercing into the margin of the foundation within, then pull out the thread of that which is pierced, so that you push with your finger or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for a day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it often, until the thread grips these flesh that are between two, and cicatrizes;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then cure the wound so it is sewn up and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all ways that you can, unless it is too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the dressing wound if it is deep inside, and then the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spine of the backbone where the fistula is made is very narrow and piercing;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because one cannot cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of bruises
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Wounds are classified in two manners:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	where they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they cut short the blood flow, and there is one or more, and they destroy the foundation and at the head of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are deep have little moisture, and they cut short or a little of citrine water or a little of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those that have them deep in the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to stretch out to go into chambers, until the foundations issue forth, and they appear as threads;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hasten, and he bends as tendons, or you hold it at your finger, then he covers in his roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the tendons cannot hold them back due to their moisture, if they take it to the apron, or to the cushion, or a piece of chamelot;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and stretch them with your fingers, then cover, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the fire of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize as it is said or according to the chapter of cautery, then heal with other cures until he is healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the fundament cannot issue, then clisterize the patient with a biting and harsh clyster to cleanse that which is in the fundament, so that it can issue openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	as the patients cannot hold themselves, and if their vein is outside the fundament, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them in your finger or nails, and grasp them, then cure them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is fitting that you adjust the bandage in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take the thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make a piercer with the needle from another part, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, and if it is double;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to correct the superfluity of blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the dressing a clean cloth soaked in rose oil or cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he should rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it cool down as much as it congeals, and when they are cooled, if they receive treatment of ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	to dry the wounds or dressing
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often it happens that there is a burning of fevers in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you remove the point of a splint or of your nail the crust above, which does not let it get moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat until it is sooted as it is necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be sooted, then recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, until it is very healthy, and is scarred.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat until it is healthy.
dou fremit	two fremits
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formice is a small faulty appearance against the body, and goes very deep in.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the coldness, and one feels it as if dead from shivering, and it comes into all the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a thread from a bird's feather, or a strong thread of wild duck, and put that thread on the fracture, so that the circles penetrate the fracture entirely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around the entire thread so that you grasp everything entirely around the fracture, and put it in the front, and draw out the fracture from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a frame of a cord or iron in this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	do not pierce, because you must hold at the finger, and press strongly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if you cauterize the fracture, as if it is before or in a chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never make an injection of silver or copper, or of melted lead or vermillion;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and never use those small and large instruments, according to the ones to which they are accustomed.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those therefore which one prepares in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cluster, small and large, is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and it has a displacement where the stomach is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived inside.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and it has on one of the sides two perforations, and in the other one;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and it has the stomach where one puts medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and is perceived all around with many small perforations, and has between each perforation one inch of space, then put in these perforations a strong thread twisted into an X or circle, and assemble the stomach as if it were a bag.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front of with a strong thread, then cleanse.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and that's the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clister with oil or album of egg, or similar thing, then put it in lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister's hands are applied to his II (two) hands together, so that they may be entirely visible, then extract the cluster, and raise the patient's legs to the partition, and if the medicine wants to issue, if it can hold as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a night entirely, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat the illness of decay of the stomach, and the medicine hastens to exit, then recommend it as much as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the ulcers are in the foundation, or abscess, then the cluster should be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the shape of the subtle cluster above where the skin can be held in place:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or locations where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by thrust of stone, and cut of sword and of knife, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where wounds are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come into its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, beware if it is a matter of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great, and you doubt lightly of a hot abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if it makes the cephalic wound somewhat healthier, meanwhile if little blood comes from the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the wounded part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid the patient's fullness of wine and coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to heal, let his meat be diminished, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if abscesses and ulcers come, a cotton moistened with rose oil or wine steeped in it;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the air has moved it, put on some ointments, until it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword's cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tending, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and bursts, and no longer holds but a little, then cover it.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as tested and roasted meat, also like poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a skin with putridity, and it does not adhere to the bone, so cut around the putridity entirely, and throw far away, then cure.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without delay, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so seek to cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, so tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not benefit, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you apply this powder which absorbs in this way so that the arsenic does not move.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	Take incense, a part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	Dragon's blood, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	living chalk, three parts, and powder subtly, and fill the wound, and hold firmly, until it adheres well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind well, and let it not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time does one make a poultice of living chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arrow has moved in the wound, meanwhile in this state, if you do not put a little of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it begins to suppurate;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the fractures of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation from there is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be soothing, if you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it also in warm water, and other mined remedies according to this method, and apply moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with thread, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then prick or pierce at a lower level;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for that is the craft of surgery;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular, and the conduits are guarded, because the flesh goes, then sew the jugular onto the canal of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it firmly, and let no days pass, then heal the wounds of the joints so that they are healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it out;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, seek them out thoroughly, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound festers, and separate and align the outlet;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then make the treatment thus as I said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from a wound of a spear or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it's a cut from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the wound has become putrid where the patient's ailment comes from:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, put the powder on it at the first hour, do not bind it with a bandage that would hinder it from scarring deeply, and let it heal by itself, and cure the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I apply attractive ointment, and the patient recovers twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no ointment, put a lot of cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of the heart, it is not restrained by the veins of the arm;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the thumb of tendons and other treatments, until it be sound;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and close up, then know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is as one ought.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, of stitching;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, so that it wounds, and the torn fibers if they are dislocated;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not dislocated, let the wound purify, then ease the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	because of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The remedies for the belly are large, medium, and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the introjection of them;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more painful, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one, because one puts the intestines back in place more easily, if one does not put them back hastily;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestine swells so much that it feels cold, if it returns to points, and because it makes the inner wound worse, because one must reset the intestine to its place like others do.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common stitches have in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds of the body and the two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and however they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will tell each one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and a gentle thing is to put back, it is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is frosty, heat it up partially in this manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	Soak a sponge or a cloth in warm water suddenly, or you cook in warm water and squeeze and press, and stir the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and many times make these wines restraining, and it is worse than the sole for dis-inflaming.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the inflammation departing, if you moisten the intestine with warm water or hot wine and evil humors are cooked, for by this the entry is alleviated a little;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound with an instrument by which one collects the humors;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is worse than the surgery, that we should not perform it without great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and it's the instruments for the wound:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut within the curve and do not dig too deep, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine leaps forward, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, then you can have power over it, for that is worth much.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large, and it is on the part below the belly, then you must make the patient sit on their back, and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is on the part below the belly, then place the head and chest higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then arrange it so that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus you must manage what I say about large and moist wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, use what is prepared for you, then hold it between your hands, and minister gently so that you draw out all the corruption with your hand, and bring the lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and it is the common manner of stitches, and it is that you prick with a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound I do of space, and I fix a needle or it has I good strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two skin layers with the two layers of the siphac, which is beneath the skin within, until you make them pierce from that part, and assemble the two heads of the siphac together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then strain with a double thread between the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound together, and then leave I do of space, and I fix another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to what you have need of needles, until the whole wound is restrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse, for the subtle needles grasp the entire flesh, and those too coarse cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because it is necessary that they be moderate;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not necessary to push the needles too deep into the flesh and soft skin, lest they grasp and open the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then grasp the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and place tents or drapes at the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and let them be until the wound is sutured;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this manner of holding the needles is more convenient in small wounds, for it often suffices to have one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second holding is common, and it is that you assemble the two heads of skin and the two heads of suture together with one needle or have one strong moderate thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you will have perceived these three signs together, then reset the needle at the part where you started, in the manner that one gathers the threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	this stitch suited the man, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and it was more than a palm in length, and it was two palms deep, and it was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine then when it had been twenty-four hours outside, and the wound was sutured until the fifteenth day, and I cured it, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not care for ointment, because I was in a place where one found none, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I applied cotton to the wound many times a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I shall tell you the two proper methods of cauterization:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and prick the part that is defective just up to the inner skin;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if you have placed the head of the siphac or cauterized or where you have pricked with the needle, and make it pierce another part of the inner skin up to the defective area;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the intention of this cauterization is that you burn as the pelletier burns the hairs, and that you leave the siphac on one part, and take it from another, until the cauterization is entirely complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of cauterization, which Galen describes properly, is like some people do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one head of the siphac to the other head, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Here is the translation:
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce the part of the finger just up to the nail, as the head of the second finger.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then make it pierce one and the other part of the finger just up to the nail, as the head of the two fingers that are on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is a bad manner of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says this in this passage, and no one bears witness to it, that one must sew the belly with two needles, or where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one part, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew wounds.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is within the belly, it is a suture more grievous than those of other wounds of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus that the artery has moved, then reset the intestine and the skin;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on a powder of charcoal, and if the artery has moved, then put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the filament, and sew up the skin, and the membrane;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure the wound as with the others, until it be healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicines, then put on, as soon as it begins to heal well, cotton much, and remove it twice a day until it be healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need of another medicine in many dispositions when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the main limbs, then it is necessary that you soften a lighter oil in a warm temperature, or in rose oil, and put it among the joints, and beneath the shoulders.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it feels pain or bloating in the belly, and often happens, then they cleanse with black wine enema, and meanwhile the bloating reaches up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it's because of the delicacy of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approaching of its nature to the kidneys.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the intestine slips out of the wound, then put it back in place like the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and turned towards black or green, then it is necessary that you lift the black area, which removes blood that does not come to life, for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cope with the one who is between the ligament, and put the two heads pending on the part beneath the wound until it's far from alleviating the extraction when the tendons release, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the loose bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is wounded, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some homes, because I have seen that a man was hurt or had his belly pierced by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was the wound on the right of the stomach, and it was enveloped and became fistulous, and thus it prevented digestion and ventilation;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I put a cure according to what I was able, and did not cease from subtling until he was healthy, and the limbs were sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the patient had not been ill in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and there are some experimenters who say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied up in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take threads to large stitches, then bring together the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it holds its mouth shut;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then they cover the head, and it holds so that it cannot come undone, then put another thread afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	That head if it is loose in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is coated from the intestine of a beast, in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the head of this thread of intestine that is very loosened, and then tie it to the head of this subtle twisted flax thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper position;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of treating the frenzied is not further than according to the way of faith and expectation;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the intestinal guts, if there is no ingenious healing, because of subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it swells up, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it is hairy and bent over.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of hard and white scar, where one does not feel pain, and it is also curly like the feather of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear shallow wounds, and other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have already spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only because of one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, by the smallness of the blood or flow;
ou por sa malice;	where he hides his disease;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	where for that reason he has hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow any flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	where there is too much swelling;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the pus is putrid, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where for that reason the corruption is a kind of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in healing, and weak by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by hand operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from the great veins, and from the arteries, and from the nerves, or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in any of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it happens to come to the property of the prime member's ownership, and similar limbs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are grievous wounds, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that does not reach almost to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it clearly, take a thread of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, if you wish;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle thread of lead, for the leads bend more easily according to the twisting;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot search it well by threads, then cleanse it through one of the perforations, for the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it is purified;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	Then you should examine the patient's power, to know if there is bone or nerve, and it is cut off in the front, and ask the patient well about the pain they feel when pressing with your hand, and the place where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places I told you about, then cut according to what I told you, and remove the faulty and corrupt tissues that are within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then heal it until it is healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you must cut on the front, as much as you can, then I put tentes moillies in medicinal agua, and the buttons just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluousness which remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he puts ointments on the wounded place, so it may heal.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this, then he should be cauterized as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then he should be treated.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve is injured or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then let the ruler remove as much of the corruption as possible, then treat the wounded place so it may heal.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and returns to a condition as before, know that you have not been misled until now.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it uncovers and searches as much as you are at the bottom, and removes all the corruption, then restores the place.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If you do not, know that the corruption is too profound, that you cannot come to it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with bandages, if it is estranged from the suitable instrument to this one, and if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave even one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if it is coped and moistened and fleshed, and delivers the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them at one hour, put something pleasant on the wound to induce suppuration, and let it be so long as the pus is suppurating among the bones, and then you will have less trouble with the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, remove only the corrupt part until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the corrupt body, it reaches almost to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if you want to soothe and cover up to the corruption, and then treat until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula that befell a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the materials came to the leg, and he was afflicted with a large abscess, and there was no way to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the doctor worked foolishly on it so much that the abscess opened, and they corrupted many materials, and it became a fistula, and there came many passages that completely gutted and moistened the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many times I mirrored the cure within 22 years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, until I was called there, and saw his leg and the medicines with which one cures it, and those that corrode through the pores to great body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man became red, and had a citrus color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I thrust a probe into one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hastened then, and cut into one of the pores as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I seized what appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption, except for that which I saw;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with medicines so abundant by long tension, and could not soothe;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continued corruption in the bone, and the decay, and then I stopped, and I thought to rejoin the limb;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I did not dare touch it more than a palm of the bone, and I treated it with all its marrow, then I restored it with medicines;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was quickly healed and restored, and there was no need to restart the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because blood is often evacuated, but it was entirely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in every way, neither in going nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take the linen, and hold it at the head of the bone that is open, and instruct him to stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another bandage of a larger size than the first one, and bind it on the flesh that is above the bone, and stretch it tight, so that you draw out the corrupt flesh to the bottom, and discover the flesh on the spot where you see the sore, lest the sore bleed the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a tampon or a bundle below the bone to cover the corrupt flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to suck so much that one can see and feel the corruption, and suck again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then discover the entire flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put a tampon below, and then suck from one part to the other the corruption, and be the sucker of the length of the corruption in a pouch, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and sew the bone or where it connects to the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to amputate;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand, or finger of the foot, if it is very strong that thing, but however it is necessary that you inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and treat it in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not cause opposition to you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incision and the saws to cut these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the holes, and their size and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar appearance of work with his instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument with which you will have mastery, according to the knowledge of this art, and it will testify to the methods of treating illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument with which you have mastery according to what is necessary for it.
dou feu	for fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The heads become putrid either because of density or because of fever;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicated that corruption with the treatment of medicines, and it does not benefit, then it is necessary to amputate that member up to where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes by means of death, or by malice, which is a greater defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the members turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards they become putrid, then the corrosion of member to member spreads, and it takes over the entire body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hasten to couper, and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as scorpion of sea and viper and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, then cut, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, cut at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, cut at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy but to flee from its power;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and thus always do when the corrosion comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, cut after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, cut off the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and it goes up to the knee, if it gathers at the joint of the shin.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and it comes from above the shin, if there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of gathering or bandaging the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one ministering to the lower lien, and another ministering to the upper lien, and you dissect the flesh which is between the two liens at a large spatula, so much that the bone becomes uncovered.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then gather or bandage, and put a drapil of linen on each part, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy flesh, and comes to the patient with another wound and abscess thus.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the flesh hastily, or you put on some restraining powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine as long as it is accomplished, then bind the numb member with a suitable ligature, and heal it until it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you that he had a similar case at home in his own country:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he had a blackness that seemed to be burnt by fire, and this corrosion came first in his big toe, so much that it took over the whole foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to amputate the foot, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long afterwards the corruption returned in his hand, and he came to me, and I applied things that push back after the purification of the body, but could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he saw that I was going to amputate his hand, and I did not want it, for I had hoped to recover the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I doubted also that if I cut off his hand, it would not die, because the strength of the man was feeble;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired of everything, and returned to his land, and ceased to coop his hand, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I did not count it as a failure because one does something else, if one is a master of it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	At no time does an abscess come on the raw flesh, and stays so long that it makes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it breaks and bursts, and the pus jumps out, and clears the vitiated veins, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is as subtle as I unfold delicate, and does not corrode until it reaches the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so enlarged that it comes almost to the eye in the forehead, then it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is so that you should cut around entirely, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a thin cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not be afraid of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the skin is thick with flesh, then the treatment of the abscess is thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the abscesses are large, and the pus that is in them is of foul odor, then the treatment with Egyptian medicine is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take aesil, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take of this according to necessity, and they make it in water and in honey, and in cleansing the wound, and hold back the pus;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine sit for two hours, then squeeze it out vigorously;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the wound is made clean, and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and no times is cleansing with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and throw water on them, then boil, and cleanse, until you know that the wound is well cleaned;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse with water and honey, or where there is a little bit of litergite powder;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	where you apply a mixture of honey and wine, which has the properties of soothing and cleaning, and the wine makes the wound dry.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleaned, then apply a mixture of what makes flesh grow in it, and it is that you take a plaster made with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you apply a mixture of some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned in the treatment of ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the hole in the wound is small, and the cannula of the syringe cannot enter, then enlarge it with a piece of iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or royal ointment, as long as it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then sew it up and let it heal so that the cannula or syringe can enter, and if the hole that is above is gaping, then stitch it up or sew it below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is in the front, if he does not let it swell thus;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the lower seat thus as you see, if it appears in such a manner that the bowel runs to the lowest place where it is, for when the bowel is in front, if he does not let it swell thus and if you cannot cover the lower seat thus as you see, if it appears in such a manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bowel runs lightly downwards, and does not let anything of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and stretch over it a layer of linen that covers the entire wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover the forces in the right place of the deep wound more large than at first, then stretch a soft ointment over another layer according to the quantity of the deep wound, and put it on the deep wound of the bowel, and do not remove the great layer until after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is above the perforated chest, often opens for opening the bowel, and knows that which runs from the bowel, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digests, or does not digest;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that jumps onto the perforated chest, then knows that the breasts have been altered already, and approach the health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then dislocate it in the morning, or the third day, and when you dislodge the wound, if you change into another dressing, and renew the bandaging.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the senses are upset by indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not yet clear.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle wounds come after a long period of time, do not despair of health, for the healthy approach.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men who delay in their wounds, and of those that do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the bowel does not digest what jumps from the chest after many days, knows that the breasts have not been altered;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the sinews are slow to recover, and it is sluggish, you should apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, just as we have defined, because there is a large part of glass, and this is the last remedy;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take a definitive ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the extract of old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then make a confection and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same thing makes honey cooked and thickened, when the definitive ointments are not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them on the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then glue it on the plaster, and stick it to the sinew, and no time should you administer to an Aristologist, but rather roots of celestial lilies, which are also like flour of vieves and a hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and for the use of simples or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I said, and for use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Painful is an abscess that grows under the nail of the thumb or hand, or sometimes grows in other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is neglected, and no care is taken, then the abscess comes quickly, and corrodes and eats away as much as it corrodes the root of the nail, and sometimes it corrodes everything;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come corroding sores up to the bone, as long as it brings putrid pain, and is the head of two large ulcers, and is the fixed color livid.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you cut off all the excess flesh that remains from the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses on the flesh in, and it begins to point, and becomes white, then you must put the rhadizet under the nail that touches the flesh, and lift it up high, and gently and lightly scrape off the subtle flesh, and apply remedies burning and corrosive to remove all;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wounds thoroughly until they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then scrape it, and pull out fiercely, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the two corroding, then scrape them in one of our ways as it has been said before, then heal thoroughly until they are healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is bruised, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary that you soothe him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the splint straight away from the spine, and beware that the cutting does not reach just up to the flesh that is beneath the splint, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on which soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two adjacent fingers that grow together by chance in some men's hands are all cartilages, and by chance they have a part or they have bones, and never an angle, and none of them grow from the root of the joint, where the growth is in no way two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who grows in some node of the toe does not move, and he who grows at the joint of the toe, perhaps moves.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The cutting of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut to its root with a broad splint.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who grows at the root of the joint is difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold back from cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those that grow on the back of the toe, it is necessary that you cut the round cartilage just to the bone, then cut the bone to a convenient size for that, then cure until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden swellings that come together at the joints arise from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from a burn by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you know that you have taken out the splint, then you should restore it according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two clean towels or moistened cloths with rose oil, so they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two subtle pieces of lead, so that the joint is joined, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you strike that joint as it is suitable.
des vils	the hairs
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	These are large, enveloped veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come into many parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they occur more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry heavy loads, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes a purging of the colon, and then the juice of the basil plant.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment with iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that they are applied, and one draws out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is thus according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Raise the first leg with warm water very strongly, so that the thick vein is subtled, then stretch the leg of the patient from above the hip down to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in I, II or III, with a large incision, then elevate and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood as the virtue of the patient can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then lay him down, and instruct him to abstain from eating black bitter foods;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommend the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The elevations of the blood are thus according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with warm water so that it becomes red, and inflates the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bandage, heat it with fire, and then apply it directly to the vein from the hollow of the knee to the part below the armpit;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and strip the vein of its covering from each part, until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it is seen as red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then push the vein downwards, until it is lifted from the skin, and then pinch it lightly at the ankle, then apply it to another place in three folds;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then strip the skin from the vein until it appears, then lift it to the branch, as you have done, and pinch it at another ankle, as you have done previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then take another size, or many if you have a mastery of it, then lift it, and cut to the second toe of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second size;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then stretch the size in size, until it is entirely free, then cut;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift, if you thrust a needle to the strong double thread, and lift and pull, and you thrust beneath the thread, and turn your hand from one side and the other, until it is freed;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and beware that it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot pull or lift, and harm comes to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have entirely pulled, put on the place of the wound a soft cloth moistened with wine and rose oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if his eyes are contracted and twisted and entwined together, and they are not straight, as we have said, then it is necessary to bend them straight, but do not cover them.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and pull them straight as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one covers the eye is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not touch the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but be large as we have said, and this is the shape.
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is in a valley in the legs, in warm parts where neither herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and perhaps grows in another part besides the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that comes from under the skin, as it grows within the body like snakes and worms, growing between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the joints, and begins to issue forth like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth about an inch and a half thick, up to two inches, and the knee, and let the cloth stay on the leg, and every time it is not in default, if you envelop it around the cloth, and the knee;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is completely issued;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it often happens that this vein when it is treated with five palms of length, or ten, and a man came to me, who had an issue from ten palms of length, and when you cut it, the reason bursts out or perishes, and pierces to the bottom, so that everything issues;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and let the material that is within be evacuated, and mix in the medicine into the wound to prevent putrefaction any day, then cure it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And often at this vein many times, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot is, and a lot of pus comes out, and from which it springs forth.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure the wound thus as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of wounds that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often has boils, and is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the whole body, ascending and descending, and one feels it well as it moves from member to member, until it reaches the skin or where it goes, and bursts forth.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, like worms and snakes and lice and ascarids or belly worms.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and doubts about his evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance returning, and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cured and treated, if one cannot be sure when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then it is necessary that you bind the limb above and below with a strong and tightly stretched bandage, then cut into it with a sharp instrument, and if the vers is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire, so that it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye, hold it steady beneath with a well-formed bandage, then cut into it, and treat it sharply;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to treat the patient with mild remedies of dissolving medicines for the bad melancholic humors, and beware of eating rotten meat in excess.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from one member to another;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see this which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and I saw soon after, it seemed to grow as swift as a viper on the shoulder, quicker than anything, as if it were living silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departed from that place, and fixed itself in the shoulder, and then a little afterwards spread throughout the whole body, until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then I think she will soon turn inward towards the body, as I see it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I had thought that they would have moved the pain from one place to another, but I didn't think they wanted it, as I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and because of this apparent constriction;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it does not appear to be the case according to this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and reopened veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you want to cure this illness, and the patients feel that pain, it appears thus as we have said, if you lift up and down gently, and then cut into it so that the constriction of the vein is released at the spot.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the spot;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see with your eyes, the treatment of those who expel wind, like foul-smelling pills, and serpent-like pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the limbs of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity is that there are those with large points, and small ones, and curly-haired ones, and swollen ones;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those with two edges, and of those with tongues, and of those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which falls in no member falls in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	where it falls into a principal member, such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then into no place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about later, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many disposals;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the symptoms of the brain when the arrowhead is in it and pierces the bone, then it affects the siphac which is on the brain, it is when there is scotoma and swelling and turning and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomittings of the colon;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is without force through the nostrils, or through the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it affects speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and it jumps from the white moist wound appearing like a pustule, and it jumps out also as if bruised flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this symptom appears to you, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the wound when it falls on the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and sometimes the wound changes as if it were a pulse, and in a short time black blood comes, and coldness and cold sweat come, and syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	you then feel without doubt that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the arrow wound that never leaves a bruise on the skin are that without pus flowing from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs deeply and feels cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the wound falls on the covering of the thigh, it is between the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and it causes great anxiety and great pain and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead or stomach, by chance jumps from the wound some undigested thing of the flesh.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead or belly, and it jumps into a point of feces through the intestine route, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the wound falls on the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out fiercely, and the patient feels strong pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	you know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several more dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the vein is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because you should do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happens to the man when an arrow or spear goes into the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it, and pulled out another part beneath the fat of the ear, and was without sense or numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And pulled out a piece of an arrow that had gone into the fat of the eye beneath the parchment beneath, and the arrow was removed, and could not be touched except at the tip towards the hollow, and it was a large arrowhead of a Turkish bow, with a very light iron wire without ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The game was successful, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I softened the bristles, and subtly manipulated until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And pulled out an arrow from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then when thirty days had passed, it did not change its condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrow, and freed it, and pulled it out strongly, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose arrow has fallen in his back, and the wound was sewn up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and left the arrow within him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor did I find harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, whose arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he remained thus, suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And pulled out an arrow from the king's prince's man, which was stuck in his knee, and it was slightly leaning to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and it was the arrow totally removed.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to the treatment after she had fallen for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought a subtle pulse in her entire body, and did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt numbness and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow; I put on the affected place a digestive attractive plaster, because the abscesses did not inflame.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the abscess of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put on the plaster for many days, and healed the wound again, and the patient remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day within his nose.
et il le me dist.	and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put on the wound a corrosive medicine for many days, until it was opened, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which adhered to the flesh.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I applied to the opening of the wound by that medicated ointment, so much that the head of the arrow appeared visibly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it progressed well within four months, and then I relaxed if the wound was closed where I applied the tourniquets, and the swelling on one side and the other, and could not exit;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make devices, until I took it in hand with well-made tourniquets, according to what its form would be at the end of this chapter, so that I treated it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, for the book cannot take everything in.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of the strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed, except according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either through the place where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps forth by there where it enters, it is the arrow entering into their flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous around, and the outlet is cleared;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, one should prick into the entire forest subtly, so that the eyes within are enlarged, and then the tract.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the chief's head, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	do not extract it, but let it be until it is even after some days, for if the arrow comes just to the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed in the bone, and does not come out by itself, and the patient remains for some days without bad accident, then the engine to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very fixed in and cannot be extracted further, one should administer tareres within, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow has been repelled into the body of the corpse so that it cannot be seen, one should search everywhere for it.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel, if it resists against any instrumental examination;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve, so it makes sense that the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds, so cut the flesh that is attached to two parts of the muscle where you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can extract it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly take care that you do not break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, let it stay until the surrounding tissue is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood makes you oppose, so amend what we have said about the treatment in this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of the incision near the nerve and vein, and set in motion how you can extract the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the form it was when the arrow fell in, for it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, so arrange it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears with no sign of it, or the skin is inflamed in that place if one sees or feels by touch:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut then so much, as long as the tongs can grasp, and then extract:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the remainder of the arrow is there, cut around all the remainder;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the remainder is small, and you want to administer a cutting, if you administer an instrument cut, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And then apply fire, and if the arrow is barbed, he applies the instrument to a precise point entering inside, in order to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it suits.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow has struck the hand or foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the ribcage, and it is close by, and you can reach over, he reaches over.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your profession.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows are similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the button-like head is like the claw of a bird, for pushing at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs to hollow out and to extract if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are thirty-one veins from which one bleeds, of which sixteen are in the head, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are apparent in the two temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspirers";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two gullets which are at the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and simple people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basalic, and simple people call it "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilisk is on the right side, and they call it the "vein of the belly", and it is on the spleen, and it is the one that is felt, which appears manifestly on the groin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and the anular, and if it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curve of the hollow of the left side, and the second Sophene which is at the ankle of the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the limb where the veins are like a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then strain the patient's neck to a vision, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two vessels depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where the fingers give you pain, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of anemia;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand over the entire vein above, and cut through the skin and the vein well, two inches deep, and make the blood flow out until you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and lift, until it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is to emigrate an ancient vein, and soothing, and accustomed optalmia, and in the course of the bitter tears as the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the health of the veins if it is so as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the pulse beneath your finger, and then signs of an inflammation;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the heart onto the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lance beneath, and lift the vein above, and the cupping, just as you have done with the other veins, and make the blood flow according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then lay down the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then apply a formation, and let it be until it is healthy;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have already spoken of their coupling and their extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein at the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic area, for old facial diseases, and for migraines, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, so much that the veins appear;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and lay the vein as it should be healthy and never again will the swelling occur from a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	In no way, it is not suitable for the flames to be too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the wound across, because the bone is near, and by chance break the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The wound of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with the eyes, and the tendon, and the reddening, and the orifice in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their wound is that the patients strain their neck by twisting in no direction, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the wound, and let the wound be across, a little deep, a little long, a little wide of the flame, for there is no spot of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then lay it on a cushion, and lay it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The wisdom of the vein that does not know how to cure, and suffers from being overwhelmed, and from facial diseases, such as migraines and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the vein is such that the patient constricts his neck, then constricts his nose with his left hand, and takes the subtle flame in length, and inserts it into the liver in the space that is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well in this way, and the blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep in the fontanel, and make the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, for it is almost completely restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The vein of the two gundeges helps with the constriction of the wingbone, and with the beginning of messelry, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosions, and herpes, and similar things.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the health is such that the patient strains his neck now one way and then another, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a stool, then opens the vein of the arm a little widely, then draws out the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then repeat the same on the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold both veins moderately, so that the patient does not choke;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above the liver is affected by gathering at the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and painful nostrils and within.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the leaf, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right leaf and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins;
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Here is the translation:
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health from beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are under the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the veins is such that the patient's blood appears between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	examine then one and the other, and do not insert too deeply, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck where one usually examines are examined in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where we prick with a flame making a large scar, or subtly with an olive-shaped instrument as if cutting into the neck, and it is called "aneuil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are large and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame-like burning is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veined surfaces plainly with a lot of apparently thick blood, and that they contain a lot of blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it's the form of the inflamed flame-like swelling:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for clarifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed moderately, and that he beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one should not be pricking the inflammation, but rather cutting in this way skillfully.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	where you want no vein of it, or you feel in its place the vein in the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it appears manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the joint at the flame anesthesia, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to know the place of the vein, it is necessary also that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the place as much as you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place of the incision, and then stretch out the arm, and cut into the vein at the flame anesthesia;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is an artery:
eschui la donques.	avoid that then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it flowing upward like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Here is the translation:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Here is the translation:
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be on paw, and do not move it until it is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not cleansed, and it becomes infected, and the medicine does not present itself, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins returns;
et estainche li sans.	and cleanse the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a dressing of figs, and apply it, and take one of the medications and place it well just up to the other joint;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the wound is cleansed, that's good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then make a cure, as we have said, with powders that cleanse blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the cleansing remedies are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possibility of the ease of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The health of the vein in the middle is thus aided so that it draws blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be aware that he warms himself by the nerve which is underneath, and if he presses too much in the wrong place, and he cuts the nerve, and he swells and the healthiest becomes grievously ill, and perhaps cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, it is necessary that you anoint the instrument with oil;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid touching the nerve with your finger.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the muscles, then they make a scar far from it.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The health of the head is assisted, which draws blood from the head, and assists the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to healthily puncture at the flame olive or at the flame myrtle, because it is the safest of all the veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest vein, and not to harm anything if one fails the first time, and one recommences.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when one does not succeed at first, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not maintained except by preserving healthiness and avoiding future diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the health be done in one of the three veins that are or are touched:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	it is to know, cephalic, delestic, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one must heal at the beginning of taking care of oneself in spring, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must heal on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing that is administered for the diseases has no determined hour, but only when need is of day or of night, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for less than four months until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner that may be, it is necessary that they empty the intestines of a lighter clyster, if they have much flatulence retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful matters from the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should one be cauterized who is too full of food, nor one who is drunk, as long as they are furious, nor dropical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and beware of cauterizing after colic passion, and vomiting, and decay of the stomach, and multiplication of habitual abortive in a woman, and of travail, of watching and of judging, and all these virtues, or through some thing of the arm or of the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then subtle the humors, if his sense is gross, by food and by drinks and by medicines, so you have little power over it.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then enter into a bath, since nothing should be lacking, to subtle the blood, and you will be healthy from the vein of the foot up to the third, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and beware of that day of labor, and of puncture, and of luxury, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be gentle and joyful, and the healers should be higher than those whom one heals, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull out the ligament above, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sense.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the shoulder with your hands, until the veins swell, and feel them thereon.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then soften the healers with a little warm oil, then put their right hand on that vein beneath the shoulder a little where it wants to heal, so that the vein does not fade and fails to strike.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	Because there are veins that flee away like cords from the sainier, and if there are those that are full of windiness, so that when one puts on the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be warned about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a spasm, let him stay for a day or two, and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perhaps there will arise apostemes of heat;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter where it hurts, then resume the healing as it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then stitch the wound itself throughout the entire flame directly;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and stop the bleeding quickly, so that the eyes are not inflamed;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for it often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eye inflamed, do not resume the healing, and put a little of warm oil on it, for it alleviates the body's pain, and is moderation in this wound that the oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the warm oil in each healing that you heal the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same thing makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one puts it on the eye;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you subtly remove the blood and separate when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes a large abscess, which often occurs, especially when it is not healthy enough to be opened at that time or the opening of the vein is small, hurry up, and place on the limb a moist sponge in water and boil it slightly, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has been let from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, Master, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times an abscess occurs and appears at the wound of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	place your hand thereon, and if you find the limb soft to the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Here is the translation:
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but you make it firm by placing a plaster cast, then treat another wound, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And take each one according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the wound is black, let it issue forth until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it be until it becomes subtle;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it suits one who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and the flames are large;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits them to bleed less often, and they should be bled in a slanting cut, not in a puncture.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of bleeding is free from blood decay and nerve damage, and is worth more than the bleeding that is done far or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to him whose body fails at the health, it is necessary to give mild pain with juice of green apples.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If he is hot, drain three or four pints of blood; and if he has a cold complexion, diminish beforehand the mild pain with syrup made from muscatel, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he touches the healthy area, after a large amount of blood has been let out, it is necessary that he should have a broth made from meat, and a subtle and fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the section or chapter on fainting, for evacuating the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to restore his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is afflicted by great pain, that he be healed little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to restore his arm after the first healing, and it has a strong course, if he is healed in twenty-four hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to heal from another part, if he must heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood inside the body that is already hot, and it brings on fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to drain a large quantity, and widen the pores so much that it reaches the pamum;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you observe all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse when it is healthy, so that death does not come into the pamum, and this has happened many times, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary when you dislocate the arm, and to make blood issue a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully upon;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if it is curved, he should stretch the arm quickly, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it be until it bleeds a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you hold at the tip of the flame, until the congealed blood at the wound of the vein issues forth, and put on the spot of oil remaining in the water, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to bleed twice, then let it bleed in the same spot, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein at the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, until the flesh becomes red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then bleed now from the crossing, not too large nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the large wounds be, and be well close to the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, reset the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow in the warm water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is in winter, do not reset the hand in warm water, for they put it more in ivy than in winter.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the wound of this vein is healthier than all other wounds, for it has neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The wound of the salvation of the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand steady, and put it in warm water, until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the wound is across, and if you cut through everything entirely, do not cause any harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not put too much pressure, for the nerves are very sensitive to cold, and then put your hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and it cannot issue.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out the blood as much as is necessary for you, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sanity of the left hand is worth more than the disease of the right, and do everything just as I told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The wisdom of the sphere is worth all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of his blood is such that the patient's foot is swollen in warm water, and rubs against the vein until it perishes, and lays above the joint of the foot.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go out in many branches;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	look for the one that is larger or thicker, or at the ankle, which is more useful.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you feel the veins under the foot, beware of the nerves that are very sensitive, and the vein of traversing also as in a cupping.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sans cannot issue from it, then put the foot in water, and let the vein well empty itself.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the surgeons fail the first time, they start again from above a little, because the joints are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make it equal on the other side in harmony.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The joints of the sciatic vein are at the junction of the thigh, and its wound is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his wound is such that the patient goes between bad and good, and extracts above the flesh in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then the wound heals in all the ways that you can, and by crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth more that you bind it, for the joints are sound, and it is much restored to many people's hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then no vein of those that open or give two fingers, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and do so much correction of the blood that you see, and then loosen the bandage, and put on cotton and hold steady;
ele est maintenant sanee.	he is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	the blood flows from a cupping device
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or of brass, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and cupping is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping without striking is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is with full fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and cupping done by striking and extracting blood is done in 14 places of the body, where one is all in a lump on the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others in the sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the cupping glass under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the cupping of the two hips;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the cupping on the buttocks;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the cuppings in the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the cuppings of the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the cuppings of the two ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the cupping does not draw blood, because of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one does not become faint, as when one makes a vein bleed;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all fire nor sense of fire, in any disease that comes from excess, as long as the whole body is evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to cup, or by habit, if we administer them every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and within and at each time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they have a task of bloodletting, weigh heavily on the head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are those who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who faint, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to wait for three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saliva of the mouth helps with the grief of the head … which comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it should be after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this bloodletting is in the place of the saliva of the head, and it is not suitable for he who is of cold complexion in usage, or who has a catarrh, because it does them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because of this it does not suit but the old man who uses it, nor those who have or catch cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often uses it, becomes oblique, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of obliqueness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation in the neck is in the place of the healthy head and of the basilica, and because of this it is worth to strengthen the foot, and to mend the channel of the arm, and to touch, and to replenish;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it does not suit to push strongly, for if it holds too firmly, then it causes obstruction or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilations of the ribs on the neck are worth pains in the head, and obstructions and migrations, and strangulations, and pains at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healthy basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it suits that you instruct the healthy one to press his hand to put, so he does not cut the artery, and does not bring forth excessive bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The breathings from below the jaw are valid for a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the place of the healthy lips of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Here is the translation:
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The breathings from the thighs are worth as much as the three large veins of the arm, because they attract blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon to not make a wound too deep, because the leg is nourished by flesh, and it knows beneath the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping that is on the buttock is worth as much as hemorrhoids of the fundament, and similar diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of a certain quality, so that it may well treat.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and they make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cupping glasses on the legs open wide, for they attract blood from all over the body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and restore the flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are in the place of two sponges, and of two clamps, and always they weaken the body after long use, and cause swelling to come in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the cup is that you put it on empty, and suck at once, and put it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and feel the flow of blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then fire, and reapply the cupping glasses, and take heed of the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such a tender skin, and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to cauterize only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeply.
et suce legierement.	and to suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to subtly open the way of the large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, then we suffice only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want a lot of blood, then we repeat often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the wound is deep, then we cauterize deeply, and the terminations are such that the heart should be perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have strangled pores, that you apply the keys of opening oil, apt and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is in this state, of violet oil, or of almond sweet oil, or of oil from cucumber seed;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in ivy, of oil from cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one has delicate skin and large pores, it is not necessary to apply oil, but rather wash with rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, take away the essence of ivy, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have thick superfluities lift with old wine, or with water of elder, or with a decoction of nettle or of chamomile, or with other similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not advisable to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but after the bath, an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he should be warned, when he must be cupped and when he is being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are being bled, for they are choleric, and if their blood is too agitated and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it is necessary to take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the basket, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and mild poultices, and flesh of capon, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and mild poultice, and mild poultices and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he will be bled, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before bleeding, or afterwards, to comfort the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtly purified, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The bleedings that are applied without hurting are those that are applied to the liver, and to the spleen, and to the podagra, and to the belly and the bowels and the loins and the thighs, for these members do not suffer from being hurt on the skin, and one does not do it except to attract blood from member to member, as we put them on the arms when the veins are healthy;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To open the viscosity which is in the limb, as we put ventoses on the belly and on the thigh to reduce the swelling of the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is opilation or stone, if remove by its attractive virtue by chance the opilation, or dislodge the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it is done when one puts it on the hollow and on the thigh when there is retained viscosity, and these ventoses are administered empty to suck out so much moisture;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot water is used, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a way that one fills the ventouse with warm hot water or hot water in which herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping administered by fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two large and half palm widths from the fontanel, and it has a small hole on the side of the millet, just as if to push in a needle, and be careful beforehand lest you prick the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and have in hand a rod of across iron or steel, to put a clamp in place, and be they great and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the blisters of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin than of the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And should one then put this blister on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the clamp of wax or linen, and put it in the blister across the rod that is in the blister, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the blister so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and hold it in place with two strips that we have mentioned, so that when one wants to, the vapors go out, and remove the blister;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the linen as before, and reapply it often, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, to every ache, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only slightly;
et c’est li forme:	and that's its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without them being administered unless in members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their smallness, like eyelids and cheeks, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in naked parts of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar ones;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the usage is that when you find cuppings that are in soft, clean, and sensitive places without pore, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in a soft and gentle manner, so they become familiar, and have nothing in the way of wind;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be healed of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the bandages;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full, and attract, it is whether there or one can put a cupping, if he puts, for it is worth much afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the lever of axle, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the levers are too close to the body of the bandages, then wet the linen cloth in cold water, and put on, until the wounds are strengthened;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the wounds are multiple, then put on a glassy paste, or wafers, and similar things, until they are strengthened;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the lever a poultice of peas, and let them stay until they adhere to the lever, then it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more of this craft, take other sinews.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the sinews do not want to take, rub the joint with fresh blood, or stick an needle in so the sinew takes it, and then put them back, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will become firm.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they adhere, sprinkle on a little of aloe and of sieved powder, or of ash, so they will cling now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish wise men of this chapter do not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is estranged the knowledge in our land, because I did not find any good in it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except by the knowledge of the ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the knowledge, and by experiment, and by the practice of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise men place their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a break or dislocation or twist or fracture occurs, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing harms them completely, just like weakness of body, or infants, or old people.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the tendons are not very strong, or too fragile;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and avoid eating cold joints, that is to say frozen meats, and meat of goose and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat raw fish, and do not overfill with foods that fill the veins with blood, lest you have doubts about a hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if he examines the patient at their first governance that he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, just as if they were cooking in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and stomach of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a broken nose, representation makes sores and most quickly the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reset or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but it is not a remedy, to reset the broken bone in the large tendons which are hurt and join the limb together, so that it becomes strong as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and not to burden him with all points of his work, and therefore he must be nourished with thick broths, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	Because the break of the head is different from the break of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manners of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the elbow, and another in bending, as when one holds a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks into a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner he has his engine, and his proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes into his place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the breaking of the bone is through that which the joints are twisted, and appears well by swelling, and sounds to the pressing of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not want to move your hand, but rather apply medicines that come hereafter, and then gently restrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breakage which goes into the joint, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be set in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not gather there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses gather there, let it be for a day, as long as the abscesses are appeased;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it in a position where you can lift lightly and knowingly, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of that which has pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then restrain it, as it must be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, whether it is of two parts, it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is small members, or to two strings, or to a string and to your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are reassembled, you reset by adjusting all the additions in their proper places, and take care that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not well:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come to make an abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, gently chastise the patient so they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, or turning, or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so well secured that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, it is not at all points, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep him straight, so that twisting does not come when he is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Here is the translation:
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	it is necessary to envelop with gentle and subtle wraps;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	it is necessary to envelop with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire large limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then one puts light stuffing, three or four according to the limb, and holds the hand a little at all the bandage, then goes above the fracture and holds it less, so that the fracture then slowly releases the fracture;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the little finger a little at a time, until you grasp a large part of the whole sound limb, then take the other finger, and turn it back again around the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first rule above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the swollen fingers linen or cloth strips, until it is all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put on something that appeases the hot abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and let it be so for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then hold with your stitches, and make a splint of a large cane rod straightening, or of wood where they make the cleats, or of palm branches, and adjust according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the staple which one places on the fracture be a little bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it needs to fit the member's smallness or greatness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold steady against the staples just as you did at the first dressing, then tie above a thread conveniently, just as at the first dressing on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the more tightly it is held, so much the less;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too thick nor too thin, and be of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are thick, just as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted flax cords, and it's a great error, for the dressing cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that there be less than two fingers' breadth between each staple.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after the straining in their sound limbs, then put beneath them poultices of linen, or a piece of flesh, so that they do not become bruised.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And beware that it is not suitable to strain the stars (joints) all at once, lest the broken limbs be injured further on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it does not need to be touched with these forces until five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the post-operative swelling that suddenly occurs.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and see in this way the method of the ancient plasterers to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that holds itself as walls of the mill, and knead it with abundant water, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common method of the plasterer restoring fractures in many dispositions, and even for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plastering that restores fracture and dislocation and twist:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	take abrasives and lanolin and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and myrrh, in this proportion;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	mirror and balms, anoint with;
alechil VIIII З.;	oil of VIII;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make powder, and mix with egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the complexion of the man is warm, thus use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is valuable to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of plaster that is valuable for twists:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mugwort and wiszmelve, anoint with X;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	mirror and balms, anoint with VIII;
acaice VI З.;	acacia VI;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	armenic bolus X, and crush well, and mix with water or egg white, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and alleviates the severe pain, and reduces the swelling of the bone, and the fracture:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take a new lancet, and the embers in ash and oil, and place on the patient's body.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore at first, but they are good for easing hot abscesses, and properly relieving the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to treat fractures that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to treat for the restoration of the bone fracture and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of oats, each a part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are inflamed, mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to treat more forcefully than the first, when an abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of violets, and seed of flax, balusta, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each a part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and crush, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on a broken limb for restoration more than a certain amount of wax and oil, and nothing else besides, and says it should be between two extremes, not too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply warm dry cupping to the broken member, to restore it, with slightly hot things, like mirrors and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of plastering that is good for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and herbs of decocted omes, or pens of bird's wings, and visnaga, and equalize them, and crush them, and make a plaster and apply it to the location.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then lift it up a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you do not lift it up with gentle hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the location, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, if you hurry, and lift it up, and remove the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light drapery, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip it in water, and lift up the location, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is alleviated;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the member rest for an hour, then place it on a dry linen cloth, moistened with water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, so that you are certain of a hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and reduce the inflammation of the member, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little bit of emplaster, and do not strain it so strongly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and subtly treat it until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has cooled and reduced and pain and swelling are gone from everything, and you have mastery of emplastering and bandaging, then restart it, just as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if it does not come to the member any of what we have said, do not dislocate it further until after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the breakage is evident, and approach the adjustment of the flesh above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than at first, and let its flesh grow, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the dry limb more than a master is not, know that no nourishment can come to it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply the warm water therapy, every time you dislocate it, and let it be each third day, and ease the ligament a little;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	through this work then correct the nourishment to the limb, and quickly mend what makes the foolish mirror, which restores the twisted limb:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is bad, and if it is a painful work, and I do not see anything else but to soothe the pain and to open it straight.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone breaks all the way to the underlying bone, as if it were shattered or crushed;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and because of this it is called this type of bruising "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the spearhead cuts through the bone from above, sense piercing, and is called this type of bruising "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and it is the wound of these two large or small bruises.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or fissure or break in the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if he has a persistent bruise, which approaches just near the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is implanted in the bone as subtly as a goat's hair, and it is the small fissure, and because of this it is called this bruising "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound that is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and it is like the joints are when they make them warm, as the braziers do when they strike on the braziers;
si entre li piere dedens.	if between the bone within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have a moist head of bone, like the head of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and there are all these ways of breaking where small fragments are dislodged as if they were shattered.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaks by the subtraction from them, and the inquiry with tension, and by the corrupt flesh that is on.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the hairline is known by this, that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs against it, then the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure of the break, beware of these accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and ague fever, and the eyes issue forth and redden, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so that one cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an accidental wound, and you expect healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nave comes to you first, and it is winter, then you should open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane under the bone does not become corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the breakage of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you mend the fractured part in this way:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you take hold of the head of the wounded patient, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and according to the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if a flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess bursts, it is with the help of what is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with soft medicated drapes soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the bursting abscess is calmed, and be assured of a flow of blood.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begin within the bone to open, and it is done according to two manners of work.
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One manner is that you cut at the narrow tail end beforehand, and it is the shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another larger cutting instrument than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse cuttings, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work lightly, so you do not bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce within, in such a way that you do not administer cuttings with tareres, nor make them too deep lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the thigh, and should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass out of the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have more, if each one returns to its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have tareres throughout the entire test.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and it's the form of the three manners of scarifications:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality to perceive through the broken bone is that you put the scarification on the bone, and turn to your fingers as much as you know that the bone is perceived;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then put the scarification elsewhere a little after, and thus do it all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have as if grasping, pinching;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the vital spirit.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have perceived the bone and drawn it out, it is fitting that you reassemble the apartness which was separated from the bone to all the other instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tenuous and more subtle than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it remains none of the small bones, no nails, if they lightly touch one of the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another method of surgery is that which Galen described, which is more safe;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and it holds very firmly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put below the head of this curved incision, which is its form.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is on both sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently shape the entire bone around, and be very careful of the membrane that is underneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is close to the bone, shape it lightly, for one shapes it well without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered so much by above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to clear the scales with a subtle rasp, which you must have in different quantities, to prepare each location most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rasp with large rasps, and then with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, you must adjust the cause according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and it is a thing that is not readily responded to by one who has placed their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the swelling is discovered, it is necessary that you take a bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another doubled bandage in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first bandage;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and make it lighter than you can, so that you do not irritate the swelling, then administer from above another string, and do not constrict it further than necessary to hold the wound sufficiently;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it be thus for a day or two, until the heat of the abscess is alleviated, then disbandage it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of vegetables, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and immediately administer Mondelfian's medicine without biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound is immediately clean, so you do not leave it to suppurate, nor allow it to gather in a lump, for when the lump gathers on the membrane of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great evil to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one puts on the wound a biting medicine, it pierces through above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take warnings therefore, no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackening comes from the medicine that one has put on, which has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and mix in the glue, and put it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound with various kinds of cures that are necessary, until it be sound.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that some times the two parts of the nose are broken above, or one by the sole, for these are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and the cartilage beneath is not broken, if it does not make a false swelling or twisting, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must put your little finger or instrument into the nose, and match the break equally with your index finger, and by gentle pressure, so that the nose regains its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the finger, and cannot be brought to the joint, it is necessary that you put it equally at the head of a thick stick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is of two parts, do it similarly, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then apply to the head of the nose tenderly with a strip of linen, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you break one, another breaks instead;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the sutures be so large that they fill the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they direct any restorer that one must soften the tents in burr, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that it is good, but rather they should be softened with a concoction of egg white and powdered millstone;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the suture, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And no one should put onions or eyes of garlic in place of sutures, and if there is a sweet dressing on top, and it holds the breakage, and soothes the patient within;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And abscesses that come to the nose while you are operating, if you put cerotate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a poultice of dyaculum.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if apostemes (abscesses) come, apply an emplaster made from flour of sisament, and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break is small, and it breaks into minor pieces, then it needs suitable instruments to reset it, afterwards sew up the gash, and cure things that are bitter and harsh, suddenly, as we apply suitable plasters and ointments to it.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no inner wound in the broken limb, then the treatment of tendons, and I put bandages of plaster, until it be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated, and there is no point of injury outside, and the break is outside so much, and it is not broken in two, except that a little lump forms inside, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently adjust the break from within, and hold it with the other hand by force, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is dislocated inwardly, it is necessary that you administer extension of the jaw in that part, so much that it becomes even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the teeth are dislocated, or loose, then hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on a double bandage.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place on the drapeau a large well-made staple, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and lay it on the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure changes, then dislocate it again on the third day, and then put back in place what is dislocated;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a plaster there, of powder from the mill with abundance of egg white or flour of sediment, after that you have removed the crust;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and apply a light plaster there, and if the plasters stick, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	many times it is healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses or ulcers come, so manage them as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the null piece of bone that was dislocated;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtlety of the ostrum removes cumbersome obstructions from it.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with a flame according to the need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these pieces, and there remains none, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The fracture breaks many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	where it is broken and disarticulated into two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one touches the shoulder where it feels the broken fracture;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches out the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then put the break in alignment with your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And stand upright with strength, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put evenness on the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the back, because it comes in front, it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and put underneath the shoulder a soft cushion, and bend the ministers below the shoulder, until the bone of the fracture is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then reduce the fracture to your fingers, and if you find fragmented pieces, it is necessary that you sew them together;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and draw the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any prominence, it is necessary to cut to one of the incisors that you have;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but you put beneath the strength this instrument, to guard against the swelling;
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not a cheesecloth, and be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the instrument;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two instruments, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, according to the routing of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the hot abscesses come, apply a dressing with rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without injury, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of millet powder and egg whites, and apply light poultices, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double layer of dressing on top of the poultices, and the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a subtle stick of three fingers' width and length, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and apply the staple to the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy joint, and underneath the sick joint;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and the reset of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the staple does not move on the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if you restrain it;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient sit on his back, and place him when he sleeps in a small pillow underneath the joint, to lift the shoulder high;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if you alleviate the fracture of the forearm by aligning the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and do not dislocate it again with bad accidents, until twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then resume the dressing, if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it thus, until it is restored;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored to the best within 28 days, and in less than any other remedy.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Because the shoulder breaks or dislocates easily when not in its proper place, and one cannot set it right except by touching.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if you adjust according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the limb powdered with mill dust along with abundant egg white, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on a sturdy and subtle stick, a little larger than the shoulder, and so arrange the stick that it does not bump into any part of the shoulder, if you fill in with a layer of linen bandages, so that the stick is held evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then bind it all together with a strong bandage firmly, so that the stick does not move from its place, and examine the ligament every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time he anoints, if he holds steady, and puts equal the handle so it is far from its place, and guides the patient on his side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is accomplished, if you disjoin, and be careful, for it's not the bone that sets in place lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone protrudes beforehand, and not beneath the heart, if it swells up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease an abscess hotly.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is never broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken within, it declines to the underside, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks alignment, and suffers, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and the sensation is not good.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient guides himself on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to put equal in all the ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then put them on emplaisters and stoups above the subtle star of salt, or another light fusion, and envelop it in a drapil, and bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward each hour the treatment, and if it relapses, then hold it firmly.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it wants to dislocate, due to corrosion or prickling that comes to the joint, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and dislocate, and scrape off the emplaister, and address what has come from various methods of cures.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the emplaister, and hold it steady until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the fracture of the ribs does not come forth unless in large lumps after the back, and inside the head, and do not plead unless because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and he feels well at the inquiry of the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatments are that you make the break even, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery over it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain, and puncturing, just like in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and it reaches a point, and all and vomits greatly of blood, and this is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they can administer foods that inflate the belly, to soften the fracture by breaking.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, because hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that some of those whose veins are opened on the back, to suck out strongly, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt that the veins do not attract the superfluities on the back due to the weakness of its disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And one must cover the limb with a warm oil in a hot bath, and place tents between the ribs to adjust the ligature inside, then it is cured of the treatment of pleurisy, of food and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone that pierces the membrane, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to open on the back of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to protect the fragile area;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then cauterize the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and apply a poultice, until he is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses come, put on moist cloths soaked in rose oil, and apply them to the affected area;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat thus the affected area with what is needed to bring about an abscess, and apply poultices soothingly on the painful side where it ought, until he is healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture comes at the neck of the collar bone, and soon after, it happens that it breaks;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortally wounded in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one holds them firmly and steadily, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's injuries are cured, so one may put a cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take heed if the feet are numb, and if the accidents that are in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has been sewn onto his belly, if it bursts with a sudden movement.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is swooning on his back and wants to settle, it cannot happen.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not labor in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightly.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of rose or oil of May dew, so that it be appeased;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then apply to one of the comforting and drying plaisters, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it be healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes disjointed, it is necessary to cover over the heart;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and reset the bone, then assemble the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then apply a treatment of ointment, softening the flesh, until it be healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you should put your pouchet in your left hand, and hold it evenly with your other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the staple above, so you have mastery;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then hold it straight, and if there is a broken bone, fix it above, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Because it happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there is not much loss of amenity at the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and make a long splint, and adjust it to the patient, and comes to the painful spot on the limb, and punctures, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, so that you are above the breakage;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and he knows what is the fracture and the shape of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is in the head solely, set the fracture equally, so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is too long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of this fracture may be facilitated.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it equally, put it on the plaster, then put it on a straight stick or beam, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the binding is equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a abscess forms there, do not touch it, until the abscess is appeased, and put on what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, so that there is no bad accident.
et c’est li maniere.	and that's the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joints are those which are between the rib and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	where one is to take the full plain of the grinder, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And lay the chains on the links, and they are raised high, and thus the patient is seated;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then he throws his broken arm on the log, until it comes to the notch, and has in the middle of a curve of wood, then hangs on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then place the mirrors to the fracture equal with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his haunteril, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with his hands, and the others should hold underneath all the joints, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold the ligature below the breakage, and above the breakage, and extend each of the ministrations to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it should be that you place the soft lien underneath the notch, and another towards the cot, underneath the fracture;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the fracture is towards the cot, it should be to place the lien lightly, without pressure, until the fracture is even on the limb, and on the cot;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set equal the fracture, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that abscesses do not form there.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses form there, do not hold steady less than seven days, and put on a soft cloth in vinegar and rose oil, until the abscesses are softened.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm at the joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put the bandage, and hold steady at the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, nothing disturbs it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use a straight line, and put on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers from each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then hold steady on the stiles, thus as I said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, more strongly and less in aligning.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the setting of the stiles, and the holding steady, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it stay tied up to seven days, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look for three days at the bond, that it does not swell in life, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you hasten, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accident occurs, then do not untie it sooner than after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put under the shoulder a cushion full of wool, equally thick, and look every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, nor are the bonds loosened;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If you advise through the power of medicine, and give the meat that we have presented beforehand, in such a way that the meat is at first subtle.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to recover, it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg are taken in hand for 40 days of entire treatment;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must dislocate and administer baths and medicines of ointments to comfort the injured place.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is lazy and numb, it delays loosening for 10 days or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two twin" ones, where one is small, and it is the one that joins the wrist.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	perhaps the large "foscile" bone breaks solely, or the small one, and perhaps they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small fractures are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and worse than when they are broken and put together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's a small fracture that is slightly broken, then one must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's a large fracture, it needs to be pulled stronger;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so the patient does not suffer any strain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then stretch out the ministrations like arms to the part below his hand, or at the wrist, and another ministration to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts his mirrors equal, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it's a break in pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is no disordered part that can be grasped by the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make it like the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	Take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of the restoration a suppurating abscess occurs, apply a poultice made from rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and apply the poultice subtly above, until the suppurating abscess is alleviated.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wax, and put on an emplaster of powdered millet with plenty of egg white, then apply the staves, and let the stave of the fracture be a little stronger, and a bit larger than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it should have six staves or arms in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold more firmly on the fracture than other parts, and tighten less as you go further away, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages be those that are on the fragile and moist areas, and not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rewrap the limb and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, as if a prick occurs which comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you apply warm water to the limb, until the pricks are soothed.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be restricted from resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the bandaging, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones disarticulated, and similar things, adjust them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take heed that the nourishments cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, it is necessary that you soften them a little, and let thus some hours pass, until the nourishments can flow in, and then strap it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not unwrap it for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	where he turns inward, then he bends his hands to his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and jerking, and sleeps on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Here is the translation:
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient's arm be crossed, and straightened directly in front of him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then put his hand on the stretched-out toe, and stretch out the ministers the broken bones, and put them in their proper places, so they are well-jointed.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and the bandages, lest abscesses come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the injury.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is in the palm of the hand towards the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken hand.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then bind with a long bandage, and let the splint be of soft leather as big as the plant of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a staple above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then bind everything together around the hand, and tighten the bandage between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the break comes to one of our fingers, it is the puffed up part, set it even, as it should be.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and hold with the sole of the foot, and if you see that you put a small straight steel bar to lift the break, and do not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the break is in other fingers, like in the index finger or one of the others, set it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	where you bind them together in a holding position, which is worth more, or you put on a steel bar, as if in a puffed up state.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and in the disposal of hot abscesses, and suck out what comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the hip is often broken, and one clearly sees this when it turns in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is when one lays the bandage on the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	The patient puts it on his face, then each minister stretches out his bandage to its equal part;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and it's when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the hip, so be one of the ligaments towards the thumb, and the other ligaments beneath the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And thus it's near the knee, and then the bandages are below the knee, and so is the extension downwards;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the mirrors to the bone equally with his two hands, so it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and there, where the abscesses come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The treatment is done in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture with a doubled bandage in two or three layers, and removing the superfluity, then twist the leg so that the heels come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the bruise these, and put a staple on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal the constriction, then begin to bind firmly in three turns or four on the bruise;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when you go further above the bruise, and loosen less;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then you have two heads of thread that you had placed between the leg and the thigh, and bind three of these which are above, then return to the underside at the head of the thread, until you come to the bottom of the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and constrain it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that neither an abscess nor a swelling nor another similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, if he dislocates, and adjust what comes next, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are fragments of bone that prick, one must extract them, it is possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, one must break the bone and make a fracture;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and the treatment is as we have said, until he is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the hip joint is broken in this way, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	in any case, in the restoration made thus, it does not bother the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is known that the pulse is restored at the same hour, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee joint there is little bruising, but it often bursts.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and it has to do with the whole wound, and feels wounded, and this senses a great pain.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one puts back in place what is broken at its joints, until it is assembled as well as one can.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then put on the plaster, and you put a round stave, if you have mastered it, and hold steady as it should be held, then reward all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar things.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "tibia" by right and the other is called "fibula".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and therefore the restoration is like that of the equal arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely aside.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it is clearly seen.
et torne desoz.	and it turns awry.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then administer extension, and set it equal, and lay the staples equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but always, it is necessary that the break be gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension should be less and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and adjust according to its strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completely finished your work, take two wooden skewers that penetrate the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the ankle.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap it in two leaves of bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this binding the leg cannot incline to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and anyone who administers the wooden skewers as long as the leg, and it is of wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done, it is in the fracture or where there is a wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and examine the leg each day, to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you treat it until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the villa, there is no break, but the bones in the foot sometimes break and sometimes two pieces, and it does not happen that they are shattered in many dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if it happens that the bone of the foot is broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on the shin, where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then put the plaster and stoppers on top, and put below the belly of the foot a small table at the flat head, then hold it steady at the foot immediately, then you have enveloped the drapes around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, release the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken, whether dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any broken fingers, reset them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put below the foot that table I mentioned, and hold it steady immediately.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the table steady below the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be standing on top of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, since we have spoken.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and search for each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone one should prick
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the female nature is broken, if you make it sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the boil of the female patient with cotton wool, and put as large a quantity as I stood;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then remove the woman, and slowly lift the back part by part, and then jump the cotton wool, until it comes to the entrance of the female nature, and returns the bone with the stick;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton wool, and when she has urinated, replace it for her, and do this for seven days or thereabouts;
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	if it will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie at the perforation a chain, and put all the bladder in the nostril;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the chain strongly, until the bladder is inflated inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the nostril will restore the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it should be filled with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the finger bone of a man or woman is fractured, restore it in this way as we have said for the bone of the thigh;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who applies his study and his use, and heeds my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture signifies more than one disposition the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	in giving guidance.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the case of a broken rod, take an eye of a goat and apply it to the rod;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap drapels around it, and leave it three days or thereabouts, and it will be quickly healed.
de brisure avec plaie	from breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has broken with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healed now, so that the healings we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if you apply vitriol, and you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so that the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears above the uncovered skin of the heart, it is necessary that you put it in place gently with your hands, in slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not appear to you for putting equal in your hands, then take this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary in the mirror that he takes three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of a breakage;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not collapse from the compression on the limb in your work, and let it be pointed beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", because it requires that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone of the limb;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and apply heat at one time, until it recovers, and let one be equal to the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, it requires that you shape the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, take the handle of a suitable instrument, whether it is an incisor or a saw, to your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then reset what is remaining in the bone of roughness and small scrapes.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If it does so that it may be in its place, then soften it with a black styptic wine, and properly if it is in this state;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the raw wound or anything else that has oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the splint;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times they have done this foolish glance, and they have brought it to the patient or death or corrupting none.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the tightenings be more gentle and softer than the other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident has occurred, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, then it does not need to be put on these.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but envelop instead, in the limb of these, thick dressings, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see afterwards on the third or fourth day, that the wound begins to swell, then remove what you had put on everywhere, and apply gentle healing remedies, as if applying Tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, so that it may be loose and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that the bone is lightly touched.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens often, and it cannot be put back in place but repeatedly breaks the bone, because there are small pieces of bone, therefore it is necessary that you treat the wound with tension, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in his chapter beforehand.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and opens onto the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar ones of the large limbs, do not treat it, for many times death comes, but let it be until it mends.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound, if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, let him leave.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come onto the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come across this after the health of the fracture, especially when it's near the joint, and it is a difficult thing to see the shape of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and perhaps cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then that the nose is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer medicines stippled, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine stippled or with abundant water or with oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and apply them to the affected area in poultices, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then remove it, and start another, until the nodulations are eliminated;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	where you hold steady on a well-made piece of wood;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of this stick is that it removes all the swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the swelling is already converted into hardness like a stone, and it needs to be pierced, then scrape above it, and make the surplus apparent;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	where you take it to no rasp, until it is pierced, and the treatment until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of a limb which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains afterwards in the weak and subtle limbs, it happens for many causes:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many ties, and the nourishments could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	for a great many abscesses;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or for too large movements, not putting it in its hour;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because he has little blood in his body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer a bath, and give joy and ease;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply poultice to the limb, so that the poultice attracts the great nourishment, and the abscess often draws out watery pus, until the nourishment flows into the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two limbs twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not perform its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe those fools who say one should break the entire limb anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these practices are blamed, and great evils come from them, and sometimes death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	anyway, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be risen from warm water, or that soothing herbs be applied, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and you make a mollifying plaster, as if it were well-made dyalilon, and you take the mush of vismalve, and mix it with grease of geese or oil of sisament, and apply the plaster on;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take fat figs, and crush them with flour of wheat, and similar medicines that ease the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And often is the nodulation removed by continually and lengthily rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And so establish gentle movement to each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortured is wrapped and hardened, like a stone, and needs to be freed from the iron, then it requires covering just up to the bone, with subtle and gentle incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put cushioning and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary to now reposition the joint in its proper place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the limbs become swollen, and perhaps by chance one puts it back in its place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it does not require that one move it to the hour when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	in any case, when this happens, if you make the patient healthier, then leave it, until the abscesses and ulcers are appeased;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and treat each member as the treatment comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the joints down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the jaws are dislocated outward, and the dislocations of the arms are according to two methods:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are a little bit displaced from their joints, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	where they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entwines its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through better arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and push with their fingers as with a pouch from one of their hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands are stretched out, to put it in place;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften them, their jaws, and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers make it even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the reset is grievous, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are raised by warm water and oil, so that they are reset lightly;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not delay the reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset equally, and the patient's mouth closes well without softening, if you put on moist cloths made of rose oil and wax, then tie them lightly with many ligatures;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be steady between two cushions, so that they do not move either to the right or to the left, nor exert themselves too much, but take light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are knotted.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then advise him to eat lightly, and not to strain himself by opening his mouth wide to chew and swallow, until the jaw is well-set and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the jaws cannot be reset to their place within an hour, and are not converted to their natural state, then fever and severe pain come, and perhaps a solution of stomach discomfort, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a bad sign;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times died the one to whom it happened, within 8 days.
de la forcelle	of the violence
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The violence cannot dislodge the bone from its place within the continuity of the limb and the foot, and it is often dislocated at the joint, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on his back, and stretches out his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it tight;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the joint that is towards the hip cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does not, and if it dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same is reset the head of the spine, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the bone to the rear;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is to the part in front of the chest;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes it dislocates to the upper part, and that happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate within for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often it dislocates downwards towards the bone, especially to those who have little flesh, for they have a hasty gait;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	to those who have sufficient flesh, let them puncture at the points, and re-enter at the points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens that some men have a blow or fracture, and the shoulder becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and they believe it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	it is necessary therefore that you test them, as long as you are certain of them;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocations occur when it falls towards the axilla, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axilla touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand to their breast, nor move with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not forced to be reset, when it is new, or if the veins are diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient up high, then place their fingers beneath the ankle, and lift the joint with force up to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it up high, then place it beneath;
si venra hastanment.	if it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the minister will anoint soothingly and comforting, as with a decoction of wormwood and fenugreek and melilot in warm water, and it will be anointed;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the patient be laid on his back, and place beneath the ankle a piece of equal linen, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirror at his heel on the stick, and lift the head of the shoulder vigorously, and draw the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and other ministers touch the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder returns now, and if you see it set according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and it is that you make the bone which is more prominent than the patient's;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be straight towards the rib, and push the shoulder down below the patient's seat, and lift the seat up high, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and other ministers pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And set it right in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is that you fix the long stick in the ground, so that the head is also balanced as a pestle, and neither too large nor too slender;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed under the patient, but so that there are soft drapes above, and the patient is standing upright from the long stick;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then his hand should be extended downward from the other side in a circular fashion, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a stick of two feet in length and four fingers in width, which has the head bent to enter almost into the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then place the stick thus on the head of the fist draped under, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and stretch out the arm on the stick from afar, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair from afar, and let the hand be extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint returns to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, however it may be, it is necessary that you put under the axle a sphere of equal wool, then put the plaster made of powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the axle firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary to eat little, so that the limb may be comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described in front of this chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are pinched or stretched or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation which is towards the thigh, and the buttocks, or behind, if it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another treatment;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal until he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and slowly in movement, so the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the bruised side is dislocated at points, and at points it returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not well set, for one sees it clearly and feels it clearly;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the affected joint with the healthy one, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is strained, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it thus, lest abscesses come to life, for if abscesses come to life, it would be grievous to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and perhaps it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and his arms should be expanded, and the hands of gentle touch according to the countenance inward, above and below, and bend the joint to his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fixes at the root of the palm the injured limb which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold it, so that it does not move at extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror reaches the joint of his hand, if you anoint with some oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint forcefully, until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in its place, if you put a dry plaster on with some egg white, and hold it firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is closed in its place, then dislocate the ligament, and let it go.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint does not close well, then restart the splint and the ligament, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	then dislocate it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels grievous after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it well and rub strongly, and press until it is alleviated.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	where you put on the joint a fat sheep's bladder, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the bladder on again, and then enter into a bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do it two or three times, until it is healthy.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see it, then place a warm compress with butter on it, and hold steady;
si revenra a sa disposition.	if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it must be quickly returned to its place, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limb is not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is that you put the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers, and the doctor puts them even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, it is necessary that you check if it is well in its place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then put the sick hand with the palm of his hand on a table at extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the mirrors place their hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If she returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then strain of emplasters soothing abscesses, and let them thus begin to heal again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot strain anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy than to strain by cauterizing in this case, and by chance it is not worth anything else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, then apply warm water, and rub it until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	The fingers of the hand are dislocated at each part, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then reset the fingers, and reduce the dislocation to your pouches as much as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it be so on that day, and then make it even on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and do not touch the bed, as we have said, and loosen it from the joint, and make it moveable, and relieve it of the bed;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and make it straight, until it is straight, and do all that, if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do all that, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	because of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the evacuations come out with a bad smell, which cannot be held, and often some member is softened, either the two hips or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the spine changes to four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez";
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is that you rewound the gibbosity that came from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no treatment or healing of the entire body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falls or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of treatments with grand words, where there is no great profit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the chest before, no one is healed;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to the ribs, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in an even level, and have a strap beneath him, so that he does not slip;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then stick the needle into the earth in a straight line, and another like feet, and bind a bandage strongly around the patient's joints, and another like thighs, and knees, and ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers adjust the bandages, one at the head and others at the feet, among the two needles;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the needle as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine in a straight line, until it is revived.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not revive by this cure, take a tube of three cubits long, and place it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and insert the head of the tube beneath the patient, then put the middle of the tube on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place the mirrors their feet on the other head of the tube, and press well, until it revives to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, if you do it to the twisted one which twists to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fix two splints to the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet the others, and between each splint, above and below, a palm-width space of a span;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and let there be in each splint a hole, where the twisted one runs, and let the splints be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two splints let there be a twisted splint, where the twisted thread twists, and let there be in the two twisted ones two small splints of a palm-width span, to twist the twisted one;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the thread that is among the straps to the twisted one towards the head, and the other thread towards the feet at the other twisted one, and each of the ministers twists his twisted one to all the thread, and the masters put the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, set upon an emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then a tablet of three inches long, that grips the limb of the gildedness and the part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient, until they are healthy.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if nothing comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the tablet that we mentioned earlier;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and often one administers it with a piece of plaster, and often the appearance comes in the rear of the spine near the back, and believe that it is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it's the bone that opens, because one must not have false presumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out with dislocations suddenly, not slowly like the other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the hip is dislocated in three ways:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	downwards and forwards, and forward and backward;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more downwards towards the haunches, and a little dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the sign of its dislocation downwards is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee at all;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the limb that is below the inflamed abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one to whom it comes to the fainting, are that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of the one who has it forwards, are that they stretch their leg according to its full length;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	In every way, do not double the knee sense of pain, and if one wants to make it better, if it cannot be beforehand, and retain its urine, and inflate the ankle, and when it goes, then it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who has it behind, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor bend, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The reminders of this type of dislocation are that you should rewind if the dislocations are old, and it remains according to its disposition, if there is no effective cure;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it does not seem that he has a good prognosis.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the four manners of dislocation, if you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	perhaps it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, it seems that you should strongly bind the limb with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands under his haunches, then tightens with a soft thread on the hip;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another tightens the top of the thread;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of stretching is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not work, then it is necessary to apply a treatment similar to this.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the buttocks, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the hip, and the limb which is beneath the groin, then stretch the thread above towards the groin, and towards the strength;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large limb of the hip that is diseased, and stretch it to its former shape;
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this type of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft cord above the two heels, and above the two knees, so that the affected leg is extended two fingers more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let it be suspended from the top of a beam, and let there be above the ground two long arms;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct the minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and let there be another minister hanging with the patient, who strongly embraces the thigh, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in the hollow, thus guide the patient, as we have said in the one who has gilbositeit, and stretch the cord properly on the affected leg, and on the peas as well;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two tongs, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the tongs between the hips of the patient in the form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have placed moist cloths around, so that they do not touch the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors set equal to his hand at the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the injured leg hastily, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and put the mirror on the surface of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the injured part downwards, nor lift from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, just as we have said about the positioning on the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it be on his face, and the bandage is extended as we have said before, and one should press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a strip of cloth, so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let it rest for three days or four, then dislocate it, and apply the plaster on top;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, bind it, as before, and let it be for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then dislocate it, and make it move slowly, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	it is to know, inward, forward, and backward;
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate at all beforehand.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his knee to his thigh, and if it does not adhere to his thigh, know that he is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your two, then bend the two sides of the knee jointly;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister stretches his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it adheres well to his thigh lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then release it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not bother the patient to get up, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all, if administration is strongly extended, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, so that it be healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the vein is swollen, and stretch beforehand towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the reduction is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is slightly numbed.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the entire joint, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and pull gently in the opposite direction through the thigh, above the vein;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and put the foot beautifully in place upwards;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do it twice, as we have said, putting it in place and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it goes back into place, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If this does not work, we recommence the operation, for it returns;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the passage firmly on the ground between his hips, and wrap the blankets around him, so that the patient does not move;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then stretch the minister's hip, and another minister stretches out the foot with his hands or at the lien, so that it is placed on the column of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each minister stretches out equally, and the passage is thus between the hips of the patient to retain the patient when one stretches it;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation with his hands, and another minister stretches out the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns hastily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, put the plaster and stoppings above, and strain forcefully, and place the foot on the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the vertebrae behind, so that the ligaments are not too stretched;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then let him stay for two or three days, and hold his limbs steady.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then dislocate it at the third day or on the fourth, and delay going to the patient for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses swell up, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without exertion, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the two feet or toes, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat floor or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot forcefully, until he recovers;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a board at two ends, then hold firmly, and let it stay for three days, then dislocate.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and have them rest, until they are healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and do not have long experience, and be pitiful and merciful and slow, not harsh;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use soothing remedies at the beginning of things for a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, now reset the limb to its place, so that the hot abscess may leave;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, administer soothing remedies for hot abscess, and treat the wound, as it requires, with dry ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if it is with dislocation to fracture, and often you will not be able to set them straight, even if you try to reduce the bone, do what we have said about simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth more according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.
