O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You sons, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest in the field of medical science, assembling its fulfillment, and I have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I have completed it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fathers except the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed off, and the science is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I want to vivify the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other instruments of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, is the art of medicine extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who takes it upon himself to be knowledgeable in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and muscles and the number of them, and their movement and rest, and the origin of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and little with the work; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned beforehand, if they are not careful they will fall into error and harm people; thus I have seen many of those who get involved in this science and abandon their sense and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut into an abscess or swelling of a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of the neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of an old man's age, and the stone was large; if he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the old man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had called him to treat the patient, and I saw the condition of the sick person and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if they touched him he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And he saw another doctor who took in hand the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctors, ignorant of treatment, held the break steady over the wound as they were strongly bound, and did not let the wound be touched, and thus they ended it; and he ordered that it should not be disturbed; and remained thus until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had it dislocated, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was almost lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And he saw another doctor who burst open an abscess that had grown proud, and then became inflamed due to the evil of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Here is the translation:
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, third son, you are in need of knowing that the work of hands is divided into 10 divisions: it is to know where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care of yourself, so that the foolish doctor cannot speak badly of you. Take your arms in caution, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by God's grace you come to health and are praised; and let go of the troublesome diseases of grievous sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien says in one of his warnings: "Do not take on a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterization and medicinal cauterization, and this chapter is organized from head to feet; and on the forms of instruments, and the iron rods for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and has the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is organized from head to feet, and has the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and from this the wisest men spoke, and agreed with each other; and I suffered few blows for their words, for I reduced length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery aids universally in every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know hot temperaments with matter, and dry temperaments without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions with matter, some thought that fire cautery was of great aid; and others said the opposite: that fire cautery is not effective for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Here is the translation:
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in no way, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine's burning cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fires are simple, and do not come except to the member that is cooked, and do not harm another member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fiery medicines flow from member to member in alleviating, and bring about the limb diseases of grievous sanitation; and by chance the patient is not affected, for his highness and for the goodness of his substance do not make it so, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I should remove the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on the time when the cauterizations should be done, and choose the opportune moments.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries which occur are often mitigated by the aid of cauterization; and also because cauterizations are for necessary pains and hasty wounds that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think anything, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for in the disease that is healthy through cautery there is no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine due to the speed of its value, and for the virtue of his work and his sign.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes back several times according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the superfluities through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return at all; but it happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we have administered ways of cures for a disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of golden instrument are more moderate than those of iron, and did not say that they were fiercer because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and said that the handles of cautery do not make putridity, but it is not seen because I have experienced it, and found that it is seen in some homes; and golden cauteries are worth more than those of iron, as they did say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And always when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled; and if one heats it too much, they make a fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use iron cauteries that we have made appear more suitable to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have ordered this chapter of the loin just below the feet, because it is easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	where cauterization of olive oil is commanded to the patient
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cauterization is good for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done due to a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, ears, and for multitude of songs and pain in teeth and throat, and especially for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by medicine solutively modifying the head, either three or four times, according to what the strength and age and the habit of the patient can suffer; and then make the head of the patient ready.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat up the cauterization which is called "olivare", because this is its form.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the sign of ink on the affected area, and make a small incision, and slowly withdraw your hand while turning it; then lift your hand slightly, and examine the affected area to see if you can see the opening; and if you do not see it, start the fire cautery again until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk thread, and put it in soft cotton, and place it on the affected area, and leave it for three days; afterwards put a warm poultice on it; and let it stay there until the swelling subsides; afterwards treat the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And thus said the ancient ones, that the more one delays opening a wound, the more it festers; and for this reason, aid is delayed.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should not leave the fire cautery so long that part of the opening is burned, and then reset on what is burned of the opening, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others said that one should leave the fire cautery on for so long, and press so hard that one would burn as large an area as the circumference of a vertoil, which women put in their fuseaux, because the humors issue forth badly; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and soothe it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	Here is the translation:
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, if the patient should use iris and pills that are called "cochiae", and of purging the head and eyes and plasters; and if one does the cautery that we mentioned before, and it is not worth.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then afterwards, the cauterization below that cautery a little that we mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After doing the cautery on each corner of the head just to the bone, as we mentioned before, and do the cautery or the place that is called "vasselz"; and it is in this way that one puts ventouses; and lift your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns are more subtle than those on which one does the cautery of the middle of the head, and this is the form.
dou cautere dou chief	for fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head pain suddenly comes, and the disease reaches up to the eye, and the head is purged with mundane medicines, and other treatments are made that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then you make cauteries according to .ij. ways, that is to know of medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine fire cauteries are that you take a dozen of hazels, and remove the bark and recook it .i. times as .ij. heads, and then make a temple where the pain holds in some way that you can replace the dozen of hazels under the skin; and when it will be replaced tie it well and let it stay thus .xij. hours; and then dislodge it and treat further the dozen of oil, and let the wound stay thus .ij. days or .iij.; then put a poultice on the affected part in a wrapping cloth so that it can absorb into the skin.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of anointing until it is healthy; and if you see that it makes some of those burning medicines that I have written or the twelve treatments of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery to the form that it is.
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a hook or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the espés (thickness?) of the heart be lifted; and lift your hand so the artery is not harmed, which is devoid, and abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in the wound, and placing it on the spot for three days; then put moist cotton in a wrapping, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraines as we have previously mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and you see that the cauteries beforehand said about medicine and iron do not suit, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and thus mark on the aching eye with a line half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and hold still so you do not touch the artery and do not go to the bone; and beware of the mandible that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is touched, or touching has great fear and discomfort for him who does not know, and who is not skilled and experienced; but I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the wound at the top of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in this chapter on extracting the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. cutting edges; and these cauteries are better than those and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain of the ears caused by cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes from cold in the ear, and one has applied medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing all around the ailing ear, or around the .ij., where the pain holds in both, and you detach a little from the root of the ear before you have signed the place of the bite; and it has .x. points around each ear; after curing the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not except for those that move with inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this type of torture that moves with inflammation of the throat and purgings of the head and gurgling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you perform three cauteries on the patient: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third in the joint of the jaw; and place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery on top of the head of the ear slightly below the crown of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the heat is absorbed; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the similarity of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cautery instrument be a little larger; after curing the vein as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit at all, and the patient has no fever, then you make three cauteries: one on the three horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the vessel which is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and it should be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clear the brain; afterwards, take the whole head of the patient and apply to the occiput a plaster of sinapi which is written or treated in the book of plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is sane in this way, it is good; and if he is not, you make three cauteries within the head descending to the neck, and have a space of two fingers' width between each cautery; and treat as with the others, and if you see him struggling, and the patient is suffering, you make one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, three others on the three horns, and treat until he is sane; and it is the cautery which is called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold pain of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be purified of years and of what we have said before; afterwards raise the head of the patient, then apply fire cautery to the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is fierce, apply three fire cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the most ardent heat is reached, and lift your hand; afterwards cure until he is healthy, and it is the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first purify the brain of years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's an infant who cannot yet suffer, make them gargle and chew mundifying the brain often with good meat; afterwards they regurgitate the chief in a thousand ways, and apply fire cautery according to what we said before, and apply fire cautery on the vessel, and on each corner; and if the patient is strong and suffers, apply fire cautery as I said to one who has paralysis and mollification of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive oil cautery be according to the method I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, apply subtle fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupted and gross moisture, then apply fire cautery in such a way as we said to one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the excessive declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain, according to what was said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the patient's head is injured; after making a well-made tortoise shell, like a circle, if you put it on the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held tightly from all parts; after presenting the bandage, and winding with old berry burs; and heating it with fire tempered, so that the fingers can suffer the pain; after seeing the circle within the head, and letting it cool down; and do this to the patient every week once with other good government, until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you see it cauterized, make points more often all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This manner of cautery softens the skull immediately; and then put on cotton soaked in butter and grease of goose.
de l’awe des eulz	of the pride of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pride comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have told in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing humidifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make them sweat or take a bath more often than fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding to rear his head, and make him cauterize within the head, and make him cauterize on both temples if the descent of pride is in both eyes together, or if the descent is in one; and remove all cauteries from all veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of detriment of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop the flow of blood as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising the cautery, how you will hold it steady; and no one makes a cautery or touches the two hindmost joints.
dou cors des larmes	through the course of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear in the chief forehead; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold humors, then I do the cautery as I said at the beginning of the treatment descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the temples, and .ij. cauteries or heating beneath the bones; and if there is need for more, if one cauterizes strongly above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	through the course of tears behind the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give a drink to the patient .iij. nine cochiae; afterwards take hold of the head, and do cautery or milking with the olive cautery; and do .ij. cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the .ij. eyebrows, a little beneath the hairline; and beware of the artery that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of fire cautery which is called "clavilis".
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	of that which is its form.
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that the cauteries are made on the sensitive areas as long as the hairs are; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Here is the translation:
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state; afterwards sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of a dead tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs; then I put moist cotton in the glare of an egg white and musk oil on the eye, then heat up the cautery to its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the crust forms there; and the signs of the health of the eye are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then I put moist cotton in a poultice until the scorching is removed; afterwards cure with unctions until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then restart the cautery on the same place, just as you did at first; and if the hairs are deflected, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	Here is the translation:
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have made the groove long enough, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the morification will have passed, lift the water of the womb, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to take great care of your work with great attention so that no aspect of the medicine escapes from your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the place that is softened by the proper parchment, just as you have done before; after the treatment until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of dead myrtle.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constraining accordingly; and do not misrepresent the direct way to him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of a fistula by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position; and hold their forehead with your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it bend its head; afterwards, apply a moist cotton cloth on the affected area or on a juice of persil around the eye; afterwards, heat the cauterization tool which is thus: and it is placed at the head as if in the form of a curved pen, along with which the cautery should be; if you see, if one end is pointed from one side to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but nevertheless, this which is placed is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is overturned, and extracting the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, if you open it, and extract the fluid from the bowel; afterwards, place the hot cauterization tool in a circular form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part above the eye socket, so that your hand does not make a fool of itself; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If this does not work, then recommence the cautery once again, and if you have need of it, and let it be for three days; after that, put on cotton soaked in bitter water, and treat the dryness of the joint until it is healthy, and if forty days pass and it is not healthy, then put on corrosive medicine as long as the bone is uncovered; and re-establish according to what would come into its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Then make an incision in the fistula, and place it in the wound; afterwards put a subtle Camahon there, from which comes the form.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make a quantity of a Z-shaped tube; and hold your hand or cane firmly, and do not move the patient's joints at all, so that the tubes fixed to their oil do not run; and it is necessary to put on the oil a cotton wad soaked in water or in wine: the tube thus artfully reaches the flesh of the fistula, and the healthy part marvelously sanitizes.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer pellitus to the nave, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is suitable for its own location.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on the skin that are called "hairs", and similarly on the skin of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks in the skin as we have said in sections, and the treatment does not benefit, then heat it with a small cautery tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply it quickly to these cracks until it reaches just at the source; afterwards, treat the skin with cerate so that it may be healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	Here is the translation:
dou movement des dens	double movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not work, then put the head of the patient in a healthy position; afterwards heat up the cautery whose form will come hereafter in such a way that you place a chain on the tooth; and insert the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and recommence the cautery according to your volition; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a way the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain comes from cold, or there is cold or fever, and the treatments of medicine do not work, then it is necessary to resort to cautery in two ways: and cautery with a hot iron and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with a hot iron is such that you take a hot iron rod, and the end in a holder of iron or copper; afterwards take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and moisten it in boiling water, and place it on the aching tooth immediately and hold it until it cools; and do this often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cotton and cloth are cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and place it on the hot iron rod as long as the fever reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries in the fire are such that you grasp an iron or tin cane, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, from which the form will come afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good broth in the impressment of this cautery, and then he should spit it out forcibly; and this is the form of this cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery according to the head that you want, and according to what you are able to do; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of flux and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery iron from which afterwards comes the form, and have two openings for the fumes to exit at the cautery of the other part; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or it will be necessary, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then place cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and place on soft cotton cloth in broth so that the discharge may be removed; afterwards cure the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the muscles weaken at the joints of the arm, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be emptied first by solutive medicines; afterwards, you should perform cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, you should perform another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cautery be called "clavile" because we have the shape before us; and cure the limb as we have said before, until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the cough
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the chest are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor cough, and it is an ancient disease, then apply fire cautery on the strong fleshy part; and another cautery in the breast between two nipples; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, perform cautery by pricking to the whole cautery that is called "poins" because the shape is here before us in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be up to thirty, or even more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make three of them in one go.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is seized with pain in his back and in his side; after lift the heart that is deep inside the tender flesh as you do with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves where it is in the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just to the side, and there would be the figure of the cautery with three cauteries; and because it is done with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, for the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a thread and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it joined to this .i. nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying fire cautery with a probe, then make the patient rest, and do not move their limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is restored, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healthy.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach cold and moisture abound as much as it stretches to its complexion, and are multiplied the cathartic effects on him, and are accustomed to such cures and he does not profit from them, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this onwards, make three cauteries below the cuillier of the pis, according to the quantity of a denarius, at each cautery claw, and two cauteries on both sides, so that the figure of the cauteries is in three angles, and has sufficient space between one and another so they are not joined together when they will be pierced; and let the cauteries be so profound that they pierce the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauteries be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that the patient needs to be cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who will fear this cautery, cauterize by pricking and marking on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you see of an inch; then cauterize all the way to the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until it be healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver is affected by cold and moisture and great windiness, until it is far from its natural complexion due to superfluous humors; and the patient is treated for what we have said in divisions, but it does not profit him, if it is necessary that the patient be sustained on his bed; and mark three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, driving away the hypochondries, where the seams of the omere come; and leave a space of the width of a finger between each cautery; and let the cautery be as long as the course of the body, and do not press too hard with your hand all the way to the cautery; and let it be raised slightly above the middle of the heart, and let the patient be straight on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lean, and stretch out his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form.
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you want to, if you cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, be subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would make it drier than the whole body; and that it does not come just to the boil, for the heart is very subtle there, and one seeks to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels a pain not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, they feel a fierce pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this treatment reaches the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be supported on their head; and then sign where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the reason, from which is its form.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I cautery as much as the heart is burned, and comes just to syphac, as much as the poultice should be entirely without fire; after the cure according to the cure of the wounds so that it be sound; and it does not suit that from this cautery use null fires except he who has studied long in the art of medicine, and by whom these maladies have often corrected.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then it can hardly work, and always it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	with fire cautery of the ribs
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said that one must do fire cautery of the ribs according to Aristologe's root, and in this manner: take a long root of Aristologe, the largest you can find, and dry it, and make it as thick and as long as your two fingers; and grind it into oil, and heat it over fire, and cauterize. Do cautery between the shoulder blade and the neck, and do small cauteries descending a little to the part that is under the beard; and do cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a little; and do cautery in the chest, and another on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and another as between the ribs which are above the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press with your hand, but make an opening just like when scenting.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And certain ancients said that no man should use fire cautery similar to the razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the aposteme; and thus the pain is fierce, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the wound
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the wound according to what we have said as divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they add three manners of cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Since the hairs are in a way that you perform three cauteries, or four, in alignment with the length of the thigh, according to the shape of the cautery fire that we described previously; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be aware on their back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart which is located near the thigh, or where the blood vessels of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevations that you raise the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After that, you inflame the two nerves as much as the heart is perceived from the other side, and then you remove the fire from the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, if you cauterize the entire cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when he has obtained purity by long tension, and this is better than the other treatments mentioned beforehand.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery does not apply to hydropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods that we have stated in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the bowels, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the piss; and let the cauteries be well close to the skin of the body.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the cautery open for a short time, and not leaving the treatment of the patient's illness after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the four intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be a clavele, which we have previously shown; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is written here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in one who is hydropsical, and are full of bitter yellow fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular veins; and lift your hand with the cauter without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much in depth, thus it would be like the citrine sweat, and let the cauteries be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so on the legs, do two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterization be from the loin, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without curing, so that the water exits; after curing with the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the meningitis
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach solution comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestine are afflicted, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you do. Make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken about beforehand or stomach cautery, with circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel, one subtle clave cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each of these places, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great, for the cure is profitable when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist corrupt humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit, if you make cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is all deflected downwards in a triangular shape, and I make a cautery below the navel II fingers; and if you think the stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflamed, then you make a great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the key cauteries; and leave the cautery open long enough.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing, let the limb be sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you burn the fleshiness which is named "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems suitable, and then place it all wrapped up on the burned fleshiness; and hold your hand so the cauteries come to the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much of the fleshiness, if you cautery each one as we have said; after the treatment of wounds, it profits until they are healthy; and if you cautery with a great cautery on the skin, it will have more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer touching or pressure, that we will recount in its place, if such a disease comes that cannot be healed unless by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes, and it is enveloped and casts putrid and corrupt moisture, if you need to prove all of it at once with a subtle probe, and be careful that you know the entire extent of how deep it has gone.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that seems to be a rasp, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the probe has entered, and restart the cautery as long as the putrid and corrupt flesh is burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of one's need; and beware of injuring the nerves that are nearby, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, beware of these limbs, and do not make false passages in the charned limb, and think that it is not pierced entirely; after healing the limb as much as it may be sound, and if the limbs are healthy, and the materials are removed from afar, then know that the limb is entirely sound; and if the materials are not removed, know that the limb is troubled, and corrupts the bone at the font; and thus one of those things that we will say in its limb.
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes with great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman's advice, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the kidneys on one side and the other to the clavicle cautery that we mentioned before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three lines of cautery, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should apply cautery to the upper part of the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as our finger; and make three cauteries above the back, or two if you have need; and the clavicle cautery should be according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring them together; and it is found that the places of departure are visible, then it is necessary to cautery the patient on the hip joint with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which we have cautered the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not presented to you, make three cauteries of olive oil, and let the cauteries be as profound as all the veins; and heal until they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the ankle
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the ankle joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division, but the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fire cautery; and the manner of fire cautery is in two ways: it is to know that it assembles burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is in many ways, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the surface of the thigh three triangular cauteries according to this form, and it makes good depth and size, and has between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and so are the olive-shaped cauteries; no time is a cautery made in the middle on top of the thigh, because there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cautery is made in a circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but make it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the skin are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And it is the manner in which one makes on the thigh, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee nor just to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches to the knee and leg, he makes two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, a little to the left; and so are the cauteries cutellaire, and so is the thickness of the cord of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near the foot, he cauterizes where he feels the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the masters are, then make more; and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, then make a cautery at the shallow or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause more great annoyance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have performed fire cautery on the shin of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted throughout the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bout of diarrhea from which he got death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two adjacent parts, perform fire cautery on one and the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the fire cautery of the thigh, that it is in this manner, make the iron thus thick as a small nave of a date, or a little less, and be between the spaces and also from one space to another, the width of a thumb's knuckle; and let the spaces be above two parts, and let them also be like knots, and have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is completely red-hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the thigh of the afflicted area, and turn it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery stroke and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is fully healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery for fear of its regimen, and few see who uses it; and nevertheless this is one of the good cauteries, which can alleviate suffering, and there where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cauteries of medicine are such that you make the instrument at the entrance of the door, and it is of iron or fire in a long bar, and in its height there are II marks, and each has the quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they should be open above and below, and join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing on the box of the hip to the patient lying on his good side, and afterwards you put your hand much on the box of the hip; afterwards, insert between the II circles of the warm water which is warmed by fire I pocus, and let it be for an hour and a half, and the patient suffers the heat and dryness of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds mortification as if by fire; and when the mortifications have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the warm water of the hip, and let it be for three days, and put on a poultice so that what is black from the burn is ostracized; and leave it for three days that purification takes place; and this would be the final aid after the treatment of joints so that it may be healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make the instrument that you hold according to what you have done in the same vein previously; and this is the method of warm treatment, and I have written about it in the treatise on medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of living alkali and quicklime, as much of one as of the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small hole to see if the point of a razor can enter; and put on top of that pot another well-plugged pot, and put above the alkali and quicklime and sweet dew above, so that there be two fingers' depth of powder as you will have prepared it well in your hand; and let it sit thus until it descends into sweet water and falls into the plugged pot, then take all that water, and pour it on the quicklime and on the alkali just like before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very sharp and is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauteries for other limbs. For it performs such work as fires, and if with other medicines which one cauterizes well the hainch, thus as thesis and honey and anacardi and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us about a treatment where one man was cured of the pain in his hainch and sciatic vein, and he walked much, and said that there is no other treatment, and that he was healthy at once when this treatment was done, and he was bathed as it is instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says in this manner that you take a fresh and dry litargire, and grind it much with a little fat, and put it on the hainch and on the thigh and on the leg where the pain is, and bind it; and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the bitterness.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a warm bath so that his body is somewhat relieved, and make him enter bed, and the pain will completely go away and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And beware that no one should use fire cauterization with such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fiery goat hair, it helps much; and it should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a woolen thread and the oil of old wine, and put it on the hollow which is between the thumb of the foot and the other called fossile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take dry goat hair, and burn it in fire until it is charcoal, and put it on the woolen thread, and leave it until it is extinguished; and do it again thus, and cease not from doing thus until you think by sense that it comes to the hip, and that the pain has ceased; and this manner of cauterization is called "goat hair cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar signs of cold matter spread out, none of these signs is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary, after this, that the patient is relieved of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three lines marked with an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "points"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the cautery claw mark, following this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a narrow arm when they get up, and fear; and you find in the lower part of the spine of the back and in the appearance which comes onto the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you have seen it cured, then cauterize it at the cautery of that one according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery affects each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cautery around the spine with a fire cautery that pricks in two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply fire cautery in a place of nerve spasm.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and treatment with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick on the soles of the feet, make fire cautery at every point where they claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, make fire cautery on each knee three or four times on each part, with all the fiery cautery; and if you have mastery of more, do more, but do not hold your hand firm except for as long as the burning of the heart is soothed.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to just above the knee and to the back, administer the cautery that we described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger II lines; and if there remains a point of pain in both, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to just above the wrists or just above the elbows, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and prepare medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good governance for him and you purge bad blood, he will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of the Syphac
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When treatment comes to abscesses, and the boils descend to the intestines and it's new, if it is necessary that when you want to cure the eye, do not touch it with your finger today; and use things that warm the belly, so that the fevers come down from their belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the boil is repaired, and reset them at your hands, and sign below the treatment on the bone of the finger, and all around a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then apply the fire cautery in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until he is pale and until he feels numbness.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the boules to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so they do not return backward; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion under him and a servant on the thighs, and another on the foot that holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign of the entire hand, and the right vein and the left vein as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so recommence again until you come to the bone; and be subtly warned that the boule does not slip when you perform the cautery; so you do not burn him; and so the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you know that when you do not approach the bone with the cautery, your operations are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their bones, and for big people also big according to their measure; after three days cure the bone with a gentle cautery so that the inflammation be removed; after curing other wounds so that they are healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their nourishments be lax for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when they prepare to get up from their beds.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when they want to get up, let them be given a well-made poultice, and for forty more days; and have good rest, so that they work little and beware of too great repletion from drinking and eating, and from too high spirits; and when they follow this instruction, they will be entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will discuss afterwards the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When wounds come to other parts and are acquainted, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make the fire cautery in three places according to its quantity, and be careful of the third place of the heart; afterwards treat according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place of the wound and make a line along the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the fixed fire cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are more gentle and moderate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to a member, either from a fall or a blow, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and be careful with the cauteries according to the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of twisting and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is well burned by the first cautery, that's good; then name it, and begin another cautery on this one, because such is the custom that it should be changed on the limb that is next to it, so it is necessary that you perform the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of messiness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The muscles are often helped many times by cautery with great aid, and similarly the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	You cannot see that the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the whole disease, then you make five cauteries on the head: one above the forehead, another towards the end of the eyebrows; and two on the horns, and one behind on the nape; and leave it so long that the cauteries reach just to the bone, and until the scabs fall off so that the vapors of the gross humors can exit; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the meselry is scattered everywhere; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization to those cauteries that we have mentioned above, and one cauterization on the navel, and two cauterizations on the spine of the neck, and three cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one great one on the chest and another on the sides, and two on the shoulders, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the veins that are on the derrière calcant, so you do not burn them; and never apply cauterization to the bone of the finger, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it helps, and it brings great profit; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from cauterization if they are healthy, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, treat the wound with flour paste made with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation occurs in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and emplasters, but it does not heal, then you should perform cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little deep into the skin of the body; then treat with ointments until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And often one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the inflammation is eliminated; and never does one interfere with it if they are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of the scalps
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the medicine's engines are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin, until the whiteness be removed, and its color be changed; then treat with flour of fenugreek and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alecost, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a bandage, and apply it to the skin until it be healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When cancer begins to appear, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize at the circle that seems around the tumor, entirely surrounding the tumor.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And always the wise men say that one should perform cautery in the middle of the tumor; and it does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to avoid it many times; and a more correct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation which cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have an illness called "adubelati", and it delays in healing or because of the excess that it does or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is to say, very old) and there is little blood, or due to the tension; and you see hastiness in healing: then cauterize extensively with many small cauteries pricking.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it hastens to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that the entire cautery is pierced, then heat the cautery to the form of which it is:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of that illness called "adubelati" so that the cauteries penetrate to the heart, and let them be such cauteries that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the disease is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment so that it may be perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the healing by fire through iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a withering of the limbs, for it eats away the members just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer from fire cautery, then heat the small and large cauterizing irons according to what is needed for the patient or where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts so that you eradicate all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized limbs a soft poultice with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of swollen eyes produces scar.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy skin does not grow, it's good; and if not, then restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mengeson has often been cured by medicine in addition to fire cautery; but however fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that our feet suffer from a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big faulty thing that affects the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations of this disease are in two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cauterization and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is that you heat the cautery iron as if it were a hollow pen, and make it from good strong iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and have subtle margins; then put it totally hot on the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to putrefy; then make a plaster of ground savages mixed with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound of the joint by anointing it so much that it becomes healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by defaulters of the body, and many times it happens in the hands and feet, then it is necessary that you apply cautery with warm water; and it is done in this manner: take a cane of iron or a wooden handle, and place it on the nail and the skin, that is to say for removing warts; and place the cane so that it envelops everything around, then put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and then you will find the warm water penetrating deeply to the root; and let the patient suffer a little from the burning of the warm water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot everything to its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus you do one after another, as much as you extract those who are in the body, then you treat the swellings that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling hands
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you do three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive cautery; thus they will stop trembling, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of painful pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never appear by default through the body ulcers, or pus-filled pustules, which come from gross corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	it is necessary first when they appear that one does cautery on each chief of the pustule: a subtle cautery of fire from myrtle, so the point is seized by fire, or root of aristology long, or with lentricular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And never do they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from the inquiry ahead, but are dislodged the superfluous things that come from them, and are healthy; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the artery that is cut in the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And always when this happens to someone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very still so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue further; then apply fire to the cauteries olive oil more or less small and large as long as they are all red; then take .i., or great or small according to the wound and the place in which the artery is located, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery still so that the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens to flow again when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one thing after another until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not irritate the nerve which is delicate, and that no other evil does not come to the patient; and know that when the blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stanched at once because the artery is large, so it is not by one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and held firmly in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who administers stanching of the blood by tightly binding with strips or putting hard things on, or similar things, does not profit if it does not hold for a little while.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one must put their finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it tightly until it is stanched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but keep it still with a cold wet cloth so that it may be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stanched; and make inquiries beforehand about those things which require cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	Here is the translation:
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you do not undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for a cure.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come of those who worsen so with their illness that they die quickly from the fierceness that they find in their disease, and from the greatness of their evil; and of these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these there is one who gives his judgment, and says: "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but rather place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of that which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will aid you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long-lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and direction, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before or the chapter of cauterizations, that I have devised from head to feet, because you will find more easily what you need to master.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from a head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes very often to infants at birth, and when the womb holds the child's head too strongly; and sometimes it happens for a hidden cause that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen hasten their death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth abandoning the work on some cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not be supported; and I believed that the moisture was so great that it caused death, and this moisture was assembled beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture flows; and see here the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head swollen on each side, and the water bursts out when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture out of it.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After stopping the drainage of tears and powders, and I put in wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then discontinue, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head dry gradually, and give the patient dried meat without much moisture until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine whether the opening of the abscess is above, and assemble the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and do so according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and take care to make a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from the deterioration of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of swelling
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort of treatment is cautery with fire that one covers the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary then, when you cover the wounds, that the patient makes their head rest; after rubbing the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then extracting the patient's neck to the entire cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly visible; then sign the veins in an angle, then cover one and the other with a sharp instrument of two edges, so that the vein reaches just to the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cover it above, cutting similarly as .ij. two at the crossing.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, then the blood flows continuously upward from below.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign from the notch and make just to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood flow so it is six cycles, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of drainage, if you think that abscesses grow there, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of joints as long as it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of migrating
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moisture of the tears and the cold in the temples and old foolishness and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medical cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries of the temples and the cauterizations, as we have related.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is hardly restored except in some homes that are too cold; and if it is restored, then the patient strangles with some drapels, then rubs the bone with some rough cloth, and raises the bone with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then takes the spatula of this form.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up to the pincers, and separate well the tissues that are beneath each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the point of the uncinate, then take care of that part according to the quantity of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For since she is not bandaged, do not touch the wound all over.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Here is the translation:
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Here is the translation:
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, fill the cavity with a lot of cotton and place well-made tents; and when you remove them, be cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and tents, until it is healthy; and if there is no crust on the artery as long as you operate, if you hasten to cover with cautery, or fill the cavity with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is staunched; and if you do not have this present, place your finger on the cavity until the blood is congealed, and raise the cavity of cold water until the blood ceases, and be steady as necessary; and that which is more moderate and easier in extracting the artery is that you cautery the vein with a trenchant .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to wait longer for the heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	Because when the instrument is too tight, it holds less its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the eyes of the patient, a large space, and then when you have signed on the eyes of the patient, and you hold the burning iron as long as it comes just to the bone, and cover the vein in the eyes; and so are they separated between the eyes because it is not suitable for this cautery from everything to everything; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head of fire, and it does not profit from the medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient inflaming, and feel a frontal ambulation as if of frenzy; and thus they are tight and moist so that the hairs of the papers are fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the ardor of the tears, so it is necessary to use this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it an "injured cure", and it is that you make a scratch on the patient who has this disease on the hairs of their forehead, then you make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and one of the incisions goes as deep as two fingers into the forehead downwards almost to the nose, and the others go two fingers along the sides of the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are two fingers along the sides of the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and each wound has a quantity of three fingers across the joints; and have prepared a piece of sponge and many strips to suck out the blood, then apply the spatula skillfully in two parts according to its shape.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is to be made on the temple up to the second incision; and scrape out all the crust that is between the three wounds to the very skin that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision up to the other second, and then extract with this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first wound the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is dull, not very sharp, and that is the form;
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the airy flesh at the heart, and let the soft part towards the bone, and let it be so until it reaches the middle wound.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues until it reaches what opens at the heart, and then make another incision in the middle wound up to the other defect; and then extract the blood evenly, and press the flesh for the taken blood; then put in each wound a tent of old cotton, and put on dressed moilliez with wine and oil and axle, and beware that apostemes do not come; and on the third day, dislodge the lien, and I will minister great plantain water, then cure with ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other cures which heal wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	Let the hairs grow back.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a vein is accustomed to frequent inflammation, and you see the hairs thin and small, and the vision is clouded, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head hurts in front of the pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know through these accidents that those matters and that catharr come not only from many veins, and the treatment is difficult because it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a great incision in the forehead, and another as wide as the thumb.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be just up to the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and tie with thread; then lay over drapings moistened with wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is healed, you must rub the bone so that the flesh begins to grow, then cure with things that make them heal.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take three parties of flour of wheat, and of colocynth three parties, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to expel char throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of these three things: either grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, like jasmine, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the pierced ear or in some other way that does not join to the ear, nor grows into the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, distill some drops of violet oil or sesame oil, then prepare for extraction; and when you perform the operation, hold the nostrils steady when the operations begin, and place pieces of cloth or wool over the ear; and hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times the fever comes from this treatment; and if it does not come, prepare for extraction with subtle pincers, because that is its form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it gets cured through the pincers, that's good; if not, make an extraction with a subtle instrument of small double hook; and if it doesn't get cured by this, make a cane of iron and push the head of the cane or perforate the ear strongly, and block what is around the cane so that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull out the form, for many times it gets cured as we have said; and if it doesn't get cured in this way, take glue from which one takes the bones, and put some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not sweat from all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear thus that an abscess falls out with spasm; and the manner of opening is that you first make the patient's head healthy, and extract blood according to its strength, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on fat or flesh; and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and heal until they are healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot exit, then administer a spatula with a subtle touch according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and prepare an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water, then, that falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient use the steadiness of condition first, and fill the ear with much cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it be leaning on that same ear where the needle is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it gets stuck there for that reason, it’s good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it doesn't, take many piercings according to the length of your thumb and fingers, and heat them a little by fire; and put a patient's ear on one side of his ear, and hold it with another stone on the other side, and make a piercing on the stone which is in the ear; and do not cease from making piercings from stone to stone until the needle is stuck entirely; and if you see, take the joint, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire until the most tender joint is burned; then redo another part of other joints until the needle is stuck entirely, as we have said in the piercing.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, thus like a thorn and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel, thus amenistrated extraction of pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, thus it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if you see no worms, take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the vein of what is its form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be tight below and broad above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the most subtle remedy in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck it forcefully into the vein; do this often until all the veins appear.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to exit, stop up the vein with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not sweat forth as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with all this instrument, from which it is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is of silver or copper constricted below at a small opening, and expanded above for distilling; and to press down into the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper, and if you see take the scraper and envelop it around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want of your medicines into the vein, and the vein is in the ear; then insert into the scraper all the cotton, and press your hand temporarily until the oil is distilled or comes out of the ear; and the patient feels it inside, and it is the distillations that are slightly warmed by fire, so that they are distilled into the ear; and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through swelling of the wound, or a boil that forms inside the ear, and these swellings sometimes go deep into the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes it happens that the hole becomes small due to the boil, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which goes deep inside, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in that which one sees, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opilation, if the work has all this spatula-like form from which it is made.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be smooth and flat in front and behind, so that it does not block the ear; if the opilation is from a boil or abscess of the ear, if you take subtle pincers, and gently touch it, so that the boil is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opilations are deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle, light razor and heat it slightly over the fire, then place it in the course of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the obstruction where the patient feels great pain in the ear, perceive it lightly, and be careful not to touch the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment in the junction.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not leave it for a day until the wound is soured, or take a tent and mucus in rose water, and powder with vitriol broth; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace another mucous tent made of rosed oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then cure until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if a flow of blood comes, dip a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the flow of blood which are treating with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decay, if the cautery fire subtly burns the lens-like skin, and the cautery expert afterwards makes it worthless; and many times they repair, as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are burned by fire, so are those roots destroyed and do not return.
de la gresle	of the fat
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times there come in papers of the eyes things that seem rough in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of gross moisture above and below; the operations are such: take a ward if the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make the donkey of large size, then gently scrape each part, then take it with pincers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it sensibly by piercing a little the paper, do not hurt the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with a suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not use force, for the junctions restore it quickly and without pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, do not grieve anything; and when the grandine is covered, lift the oil of salt water, and cure the limb of what charity brings as long as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Here is the translation:
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the limb with your fingers and feel the crackling within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the treatment is that the patient puts his head in a healthy position; and then takes a thread of linen, and sets up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains fatness from each part, then places it on him; and presses with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the fatness is gathered within the circle; then makes a slight cut with a sharp scalpel, and does not make it larger than the wound made for bloodletting; and makes the skin deep enough that you reach the fatness; and in many dispositions the fatness comes out of the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Draw out then with a piece of charpit cloth between your fingers at the bottom, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread; and be careful not to touch the cut, that you do not reach the whole scalpel just up to the eye, that you do not make it bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the patient does not open at the beginning of the wound, apply a small amount of gentle pressure to the wound so it opens; then hold steady as we have said, then spread a thin layer on the affected area and water, and put it on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break it and put it back in place to correct that moisture which has stayed behind.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then treat it with soothing ointments until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born joined to another than the natural ones, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and cause various kinds of diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so that it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iii. ways: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine applied according to whether it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, prick a needle at all points; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow beneath these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn to the ruler; then make in the part beneath the paper, beneath the hairs adjusted, all the spatula coping, from the large needle up to the small; then extract the thread, and place beneath the paper a small piece of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper an image of an anchor, like the leaf of myrtle, and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into sections.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is a need for a dressing, take a large quantity of paper according to how much the paper is moistened; then spread it all over the spatula along the two lines that you have signed, and start from the great artery up to a small one; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the heart, then scrape everything; then assemble the two lips with a suture of a needle and all the subtle thread of linen, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluous filaments on the two eyebrows disappear into nothingness, if you want to do this; and if not, if there is no cure, then leave the suture and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without a dressing of dry and constricting things, because the paper will revive suddenly from the wound and its assembly, but the dressing is deadly (as the ancients said), and it's work without fear; and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that should be like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, three onions' worth according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply this which overcomes small equal forces uniformly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread through the large artery, and the second thread through the small one, and assemble them evenly between your two fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin on which you have made the sign, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing; but none of the times does the hair of the papyrus convert: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the suture on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the parchment and make it dense according to what I have said, and then make .ij. wounds by art, and .ij. subtle stitches as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is; and apply as .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what overcomes the parchment of the eye, and strain the .ij. wounds of the .ij. parties firmly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin that was strained will become numb and harden, and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the scalp has forces, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is sewn, and if the papyrus is lifted, and they will no longer sprout hairs; and this is the shape of the two canals that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Here is the translation:
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the pursuit is treated and the hairs do not come with it, so pull the pursuit to the underside along the entire thread that you have ordered it, until the pursuit appears through two pertuses above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then if you pull the pursuit and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 8 or 9 hours, until the hairs are rooted in their place and the flesh grows over; and if the hairs are short, so accompany them with a long hair from natural whiskers, and be elevated with that which you leave, until it is elongated and then set free.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the vision of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the putridity comes into the eye, it has two manners: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work is that you make a suture, and separate the lips of it, and put in threads of linen, and bind it so it may be healthy; and it does not seem to me that you should use in the cure of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do that, the disease will return worse than the first; but it works with softening things, like fenugrec; and the rose water or attar and linseed oil are applied, and ointments of dyaquilon fondut in any of the eyes, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and this is the cure for that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you take heed not to let it sink back into its original form; and these works that we have spoken of are only remedies for this illness, so that it does not relapse into its original form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is beneath, truly named "axacrati", is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cauteries and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, on which there are two threads, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pierce through the left arm vein as far as the right, so that the threads enter into the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above the entire needle, and cover with a large spatulum.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is needed, it's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the wound, and turn the paper, and make two wounds or sutures within the paper; and be the heads of the two wounds at the angles of the incision that you have covered, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has no "I griesche"; then remove this flesh, according to the quantity whose sides are adjusted below, from what follows the paper, then join the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of linen; then apply the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines and tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or a break or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain wound beneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is presented before; then remove between the .ij. leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to arrange everything so that they can make it return to its natural shape; and the patient himself, according to what he needs of treatment and instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	because of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this joint has mains homes in such a way that the paper above is soaked with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, so that you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient may not suffer from the too-sharp or too-blunt spatula touching the oil; and make your incision, by carefully scraping off what is assembled, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural shape; and it is all healthy, and never again becomes inflamed with salty water, and raises a gentle and soothing warmth, and of collar; then put between the paper and the oil a linen tent, and place on the oil a soft, abundant ointment; and after three days use gentle collars and soothing things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the corner is affected in two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard, rough spot, and another which is not nervous but appears as a white, moist, congealed humor, when touched with iron and pricked with pincers, if it cannot be om; and both and other appearances start from the great eyelid, and increase little by little until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then opens their eyes; and holds the skin with one hand, then coils the corner with pincers of small double wire, and stretches it upwards; then takes a needle, and inserts a horsehair, or a cow hair, or an ox hair, and a strong thread; and doubles the point of the needle a little and fixes it in the corner, and pierces it all the way through, and holds the corner with a thread and stretches it upwards, and scrapes all the hair from the side of the corner which leads to the prune and the swoop of the hair just at the head, then cuts off the remaining part at the root of the eyelid with a subtle and fine force, and lets the natural flesh or eyelid heal, so that by the incision, the course of the tears does not become accustomed; and never does the corner settle into the onion-shaped wound, nor to the thread, as we have said; then scrapes all the subtle skin from which this form is made.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the skin does not touch the raw flesh and breaks it, and that the prune is not perceived; and after the incision, put a little of soothing boric water in the eye, and make a collar of litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what he needs so that he may be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot apply the needle, and the nails cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medicines; and grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so open the eye of the patient, and take the lighter spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail subtly, and if you see it diminishes to a point and the reason approaches, so distill from your mouth into the hollow of the colon made of litargire and red colon and broiet, and stop up the eye just until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method, until it is entirely restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the eye, as if an aposteme is hot, then apply the lathe, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healthy, then recommence the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts at night in the eye by great annoyance, so suspend it from the nail, and cut off a part but not entirely, because the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the hollow red colon made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows on the fingernail
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Here is the translation:
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But always it is necessary that you elevate the cure of each oil weak from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and they take away its function and blind the eye entirely for a long time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the eye, in which there is a defect, it is strong, and there is no other disease besides this defect; then thus proceeds the treatment: instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the delicate double onions be according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two onions by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then you coil the strong veins subtly, and extract the blood hour after hour, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and beware that you do not block the eye at the points of the tiny pores, and perform this operation at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your operation so that you do not grasp more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill in the collyrium green and red to corrupt what is remaining of the vein.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all that in that hour, then make a poultice on the eye of soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pains are alleviated and are assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this manner which is presented beforehand until it is healthy; and this is the form of the treatments:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is named "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with fire cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said beforehand, and it is not yet healthy, if it is engendered in the eyes that you make an incision on the abscess, there where it must be opened, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take out all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "aspre chief", and make it from iron indeed a chief reont, and sharpen it as if it were a lime, just as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the corroded part of the bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the bone with excitative medications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the eyes are cloudy, and there is birth, and the body of the eyebrow is cloudy, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not become inflamed and is not apostematous, and bad accidents do not occur, knowing that it is healthy; if not, if there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to the opening of the nostril according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone for the second time with iron, and with bitter medicines, and when it is discovered thus take the forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated up to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the patient's arm where the bloodletter is, and withdraw your hand from the eye I prick, then turn the whole forearm so that it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by means of the veins if they hold their hand against their forehead; and then restore the dry medicine, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh becomes soft and the bones are uncovered, you see the matter at the forehead; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing apart of a diseased vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the diseased vein, then it opens, and comes forth like grains of resin, and is astonishing to see; then if you see the vein clogged, the operations are such that you put a needle at the root of the affected part below, then put another needle where it has double thread from the affected vein; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then take hold of the vein with double thread and bind one part of the vein around, and hold it well, then pull out the needle and put it on the same moist place in abundance of water; and let it be until the threads join with the vein, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healthy; and often the wound is restrained by the vein each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce with a subtle spatula which comes in front of the eye, and correct the moist albugeous matter and descend beneath the eyes, and enter soon thereafter; then hold it steady until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the orbit of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a bubble that forms in the eye, appearing as a water drop, and it's not really a water drop; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands from both parts, and move so that you see the bubble come up to your eyes; then be fixed, and do not descend or scatter the light, and see the patient's things as they usually are; and if it does not descend below, know that it's a water drop, and if the descents of the bubble are not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des aigues de l’oil	the veins of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the similarities of wounds in the division, and this is what is necessary to perceive; if one operates according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy eye firmly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your right hand if the eyes are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then place the point of the instrument below the crown by the thickness of a thread in that white part of the eye at the least painful spot, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and twist your hand until it penetrates into the white part of the eye, and feel that almagda reaches the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be according to the measure of the spaces which is from the prunele to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the eye; if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the woven fabric, and then place the instrument near where the wound is, then press it down one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation:
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest, the patient rises by the second path, puts the fire with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, then extracts the almond gently turning the hand little by little; and then adds to the ague a little of the gemstone, and relieves the eye within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then puts by default the eyes steeped or washed in rose oil and in abundance of egg white, and binds with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our kind, put on common broth with an abundance of egg whites.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the maggots cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is thus formed:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And you pierce the conjunctival sore, and do not go too deep in the font, but make the subtle passage, then extract the almond as we have said; and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient who is sleeping, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and be careful of all movements, and take light food, and does not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie him in that same dark house, and tests his sight, and makes him see certain things, and then puts back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you delay this, because the ague rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Here is the translation:
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then he leaves the house little by little, and converts into his case; and knows that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made maggots perciet, which drew out the water, but nevertheless I never saw any of them in our land, nor did I ever read about them in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of amputation, because those who do not know them go astray; and thus they should be properly prepared.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And thus the head of the bone is in this subtle joint, and the last one in three angled corners.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No times are born or born various diverse characters, because there are some that seem like scorptions with many feet; and if it has such a character of fixed color, and if it has a character of soft bone-colored.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of those characters which are soft and not fixed, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and throw the onion at those characters, and treat them with fires; for you know how to sustain the subtle spatula on one side, as long as you know that this character is all ostensible.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be cured, open everything .i. of the subtle instruments gently, so that nothing stays; and without overwhelming yourself, or an abscess bursts, drain it as it should; and if they are malignant apostemes, hurry and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned away, then pour in water or vinegar and wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nostrils do not open, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is a character born in the above bone, which the strumens do not come to cut: then you must put the thread of flax a little thick, and be careful with our hands, and have between each nail of space I ought or less; and put the patient's head at the end of the thread in his nose as one can, and treat it odorously until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times children do thus as schools, and it is an easy thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other in being as we are with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do so much that you know how the nodes have corrupted this flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and apply the thread in Egyptian stitching, and put it back in place as before; do this for three days or more, until the stitches corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a compress on the wound for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterward, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where they distill oils and medicines in the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp cover, like a small tube, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a small tube close by, and let the instruments be plain for cleansing the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" occurs on the head above the nose, and it grows and becomes large, so much that it is visible to behold; and therefore you must burn the tumor at its beginning, and remove all the flesh, then apply the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay in covering until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, of a dark color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when you cover it many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that you can completely cover it, then you cure the patient and remove their fear, and heal the place with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is covered and swollen
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when continuous suppurations come into one of these cartilaginous wounds, it profits little, because in some homes.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then to cancel what has happened to none, if you see that the wound is fresh in all its blood; and then adjust the two lips to a seam, then heal until it is healthy; and if the lips are already separated from one part to another, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their skin until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a seam, and hold them in place, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and burn incense; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other suitable plaster, and let it stick by itself, then heal with stitching until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the treatment is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the treatment of the belly wound; or with thread, as I have made you aware.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have dens abscesses on the lips, similar to grains of vezes, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and divide into each node, and take them as pincers and cut into each part; then apply the lee after the incision of vitriol broth, so that the blood is staunched; and then apply the oil of Hazel, and cure the lip of dry things until it be healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it is necessary to cauterize the gums that are swollen, which the ancients called "albulus"; if it is necessary for you to hold them in place with bandages, and apply a poultice at their root, and let the blood or wound flow; then put on top of the vitriol ointment, or other powders that constrict and dry; and if this swelling returns after incision, and many times happens, if you cauterize it for the second time, and it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatment for coping with excess flesh.
des sordens	of wounds
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs which are smooth and slippery; and sometimes the black, citrine, and greenish teeth come to corruption, and are foul-smelling; if it is necessary for you to hold the patient's head between your hands, and their jaws be in your saint, and take out the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then start again on the second day and the third, until you have taken everything out; and know that teeth have need of various forms of treatment for removal, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one removes from the teeth have other forms than those that are between the teeth; and these forms and others will be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat a tooth with pain that you delay to handle it as much as you can, because one should not hurry to do it; for it is a very high substance just up to then that one has no excuse to hurry.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to undergo treatment, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth's ache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and they treat the good tooth; and yet the pain does not depart from them, until the bad one is estranged, for we have already wanted to do this to those healthy ones; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a spatula strongly to ward off the gum from all parts; then move your fingers or subtle tenacities at first a little and a little, until they are well estranged, then hold the tenacities firmly; and let the head of the patient be in your healthy hands between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part lightly, and remove it as you did at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perceived and gnawed, it is necessary that you fill it with drapels, where the perforations are; and if you hold subtly as tongs, so it does not break while holding; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you do well to beware that you do not break it, and leave a part remaining, and return to the patient by the malice of the root which causes greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have related; but they come to it through the obscurity of this great malady caused by the roots that remain, or by the cartilage that breaks, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, if you wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if a discharge of blood comes, which often happens, if you apply the place with vitriol broth; and if this does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	Here is the translation:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the track, and let them be of well-made iron, and let them be toothed to hold in place.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains in the wound, it is necessary that you put on the wounded place a moist cotton cloth for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the wounds are softened, then apply the tongs called "algefri", because the head seems to be in a state of healing; and they should be made thus like a file and that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to issue into all these pincers, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put the instrument called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and big so it does not break easily, and if the root jumps up through that, it is good; if not, then you aid with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one aids with this instrument which has many rules, from which the form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are presented in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles a large clamp, from which the form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be strong so they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease demonstrate, for there are some diseases where the ancient ones did not teach at all about an instrument due to the diversity of ages, and it does not break in the cartilage or in other bones, or it pierces, if one searches for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and aid with the gestures, from which the form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be thick and hold well to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and ostrude; and then restore the lever of convenient medicines for that, and if there is porousness in the bone, and it is small, then take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body shape, and its form is ugly, especially in small women, then it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot smooth or file: then take the file; and if it is sharp with the tooth, then take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and is of iron inde at the end of the instrument.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the handle is small and small in the hands for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a part of the file as it is its shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth small and small in the hands gently, so that it does not move too much while it cuts; then smooth out the end to remove any roughness, and if the teeth are too pointed and they bite the tongue, then it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front tooth is dislodged, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that it does not slip, and you have treated them with medicines that constrict, but it is of no use; if you need to hold it back with a thread of gold, for the silver thread turns green and rotten, but the gold one never moves; and let the middle thread be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to reposition the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the head between the bad teeth, even if there is one or more, until you arrive at the healthy tooth on the other side; then recommence the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and carefully, so that it does not move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then gather the heads of the thread to a tin, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth, and set it so it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it thus straight as long as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the threads break, hold it with another thread; if it stays and serves thus all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and the two fingers, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, you put it back in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said; and do not intervene with one who is not wise and suffers, and never makes the form of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and holds it in place as we have said, and stays and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	from the copper of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	It never happens that the threads which come from under the tongue or naturally, do not stay thus; or by accident of a wounded palate; and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue; then gather the nervous thread of large size, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you anoint with unguent and gather the large ligament; and beware that the fissure is not too deep, for the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the water of rose-water and of vinegar, or of cold water, then put under the tongue a strip of linen; and touch the patient every night, so that the wounds may heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the flow of blood comes, put the vitriol ointment on the spot; and if the wound is vain, then cauterize it with a slow cautery fire, which is good for this; then treat another treatment until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see the color of the wound as copper or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to a blister, and there is moisture, then anoint with unguent, and make a subtle spasm of the skin, and deliver from one part and another; and if the wound does not heal according to your work, then put on vitriol bruised as much as it is stained, then return to your work until you have treated everything fully; then lift up the water of willow and of seed, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come ulcers in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "II amandres"; when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, beware: if it is a hard abscess with little sensation and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the flow of blood; but let it be until it is ripe, and then you will remove it, or it would break apart by itself; and if it is of a pale color and the root is subtle, adjust the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscess has cooled down and is calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head should be in good health, and open their mouth and grasp the instruments between their hands, and press the tongue underneath all the instruments, because this is the form; whether it is of silver or subtle iron, just like a small knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Here is the translation:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle, because it is the shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting from one part, and name the other; and when you have cut one of the armatures, cut the other in the same manner, and after incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and cold, and if the blood flow is stopped, gargle the patient with hot water, or apply poultices of green grapes so they are ripe, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is staunched; then cure until it is healthy; and no other time do abscesses grow in the throat except the two armatures, if you cut them thus like the two armatures together.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was nestled deep in her throat, it is to be known as a small abscess; and it had almost closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was obstructed, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had almost put out two veins through the two openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then, and inserted an onion into one nostril, then the flow was heavy, and a large portion of blood came out; then I made another insertion in the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards I inserted the onion into these abscesses, and cut away a part, and only a little blood came out; and thus the passage of the woman's throat was unclogged, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess receded again, and refilled the void I had made, so much that it became very large; then I ignited it and cauterized deep in her throat: thus it remained without growing further; and I parted from these parts, and knew only God could do something about it afterwards.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the vein descends to the skin, and it is inflamed and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and rounded, it is called an "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is purified as we have said in the division, and the purification does not benefit at all, and you see that the swollen abscesses are alleviated, and it is subtle; then it is necessary to cut it; and the one that is rounded, gathered, and not long; and it is sanguine or of reddish color or black, then it is necessary to avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before; then prick the vein with a needle, and draw from beneath, and cut around two of the instruments that I have said for the incision of the two handles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the excess flesh which is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it will grieve the voice and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the II amandres, and cure until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear about cutting, it is necessary that you use gentleness at the cautery of the senses for fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of cautery is sharp and pointed.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in your healthy hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confines with a sharp lively heat, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing the movement of this instrument, from which there is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, not like the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put ash in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and in the pot there should be an instrument that filters according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it is of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be placed in the patient's mouth as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, so that the eye becomes mortified; afterwards, you begin frequently, so that the eye dries out, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do it further unless at the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a piece of egg white in the chief, so that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; for the egg white does not let the vapor pass into the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether, safe.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or something else; so you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing clearly; and what does not appear and is stuck in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and attach the sponge to the thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be stuck, and then pull it out further; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take the instrument for extracting according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the curved instrument be at the head so that it can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest everything goes awry, nor does it push inside; and it is of value that the patient holds the instrument, because it is held or the thing is easy; if it holds below, where it draws everything equally along the entire instrument, as long as it goes smoothly.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the sensitivity of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No medicine is suitable for the wound, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not profit, then look into the patient's throat towards the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, pull it out completely with small forceps, or subtle tongs that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it's not suitable, take a curved hook, and insert it into the patient's throat, then make a movement with the hook to draw out the iron that is hot.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you tease the patient with water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full view of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it glide in sensibly, and move it with his own hand often; and if you feel the vein sense the water, then bleed.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it doesn't bleed as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with acetite, with the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and it is placed covertly in a perforated container, and in this container the head of the instrument; then you throw in the fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches just to the wound; and the wound will now heal, and if it does not heal, then recommence the fumigation many times; and the patient suffers thirst, and eats salty and bitter things, and does not drink any water; and then the treatment is complete when it is expelled through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument to which one treats the blood, if it is, when one can see it, similar to bent tenailles entering the throat; and it has the appearance of a beak of a sign, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see there the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many abscesses are similar, according to what is remembered and comes afterwards in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in size; and it is in two manners, one of which is in its own resemblance, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the cases where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the body are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced, as long as the bowel is mature according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are on the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from the joints, and one lets them be until they are ripe within, perhaps because the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Where the abscess is in the principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is in the foundation, one should pierce it in this way so that it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for that which is in the foundation, lest it putrefy within, and become fistulous, and cannot be healed in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the sign of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its accomplishment, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and gentle debate and arrangement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be long in the course of the body, and if the abscesses are in hands or feet, or joints and veins, and in all equal parts where there is no putridity.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, one should apply a cautery to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is better that you let the perforation until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it in front of that, the clean body of the venom will flow from him, and it is full of much filth; and by chance they will harden the lips and the deep parts of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs have need of.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you make small openings for small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the skin, and cover; when it has become thus as I dress, and is softened, it is necessary to do thus as one does for blisters: and if there are those that are cut in three angles, and if there are those that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the groin; and if there are those where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Here is the translation:
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the desperate patient has often succumbed to the issue of the bowel, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid, then, this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, if you evacuate the wound, and examine whether the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain ulcer, if you apply tinctures of flax or cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must put a tent over each so they do not touch one another; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around, then you must fill with much cotton or rasping of flax thread in the sense of moisture, and place it just to the third day; then remove it, and cure by ointment until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if you remove blood that has come to the surface of your work, if you handle it with cold and dryness, and wrap it in a cloth, and place it on the limb that is suffering from repeated removal.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood removal persists, you should handle it with governance and cure, and the powders that I have mentioned in my book, and if it is winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then you must put on warm and oiled tents and drapplings; and if it is summer, and the limbs are hot, then you should put on cool and oiled drapplings, or in wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then dislodge the abscess and the swelling and the cure, as it is fitting, until they are healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where wounds occur from small abscesses, and there are ways for us that are in veils, just like the swelling of a gland, and much is similar.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There is fat and such things where there is moisture, just like pus; and if there are such things that are hard and piercing to the cutter, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the cutting are such that you experience everything with the instrument called "entromissoire", from which the form comes after this, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then they make a passage downwards along the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is evacuated, then they scrape without leaving any skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing; then they plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, with water and silk, and they fill the wound, and leave it until the next day; and they correct what has remained of the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain painful at night; then treat the wound of piercing in a suitable way, so that it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in a fatty substance, then cut according to this form, from the length; and you will throw out the uncines, and scrape off all parts, and put all your treatment of drawing forth for the cotte where it lies; and if the artery makes you do the opposite, then do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And thus do with the abscess if it is porous, and of cutting and of curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the porous abscess and the moist one, if it is lighter, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there are any of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and among these I treated the head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and bluish, and could not break it open; and if one had made a strong effort, one would have done harm like breaking into a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming on the head, those which come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, one should open them so that they are completely dependent on the patient, in order to issue forth the pus; and the treatment should be as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur on the neck, and beneath the shoulder blades, and in the groin area, and sometimes they come from another part of the body, and are numerous, and are connected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each ulcer is properly located within its side, as the swelling and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these ulcers are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that case where you see a good disposition in the touching, and it is similar to the color of the body, and moves from one part to another without being airy as nerves to the collar or to the artery, and it is not deep; so it is necessary that you cut above, and scrape off each part, and remove the two lips of the heart as onions, if you are in mastery, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and pull gently, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not let the spatula slide, lest your hand slips, and do not push too far, so you do not touch what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not let you operate, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound steady; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, until you complete it; then inquire with your finger whether there remain any small scrophulae, if you cut and mend them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrophula, it does not behoove that you cut into that scrophula at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall away by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more excess flesh due to the greatness of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of it, and make a groove, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofula that have excess flesh, pierce where it appears to die; and pierce thus as stated before, depending on the condition, then treat with ointment and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, treat with ointment, heating the char, until it be healthy.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and it's the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the partition of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be examined; and one should not do anything except by this, because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the pormon, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it beneath three circles or four small cuts across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut which passes through the syphac, not in the cartilage; and thus it is convenient for the section of the epiglottis that there be no char, and the vessels are long enough to inquire.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the masters are fearful, then it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire neck, then cut through the heart as far as it reaches the canal; and let out the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then touch the syphac, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the flux of the canal which goes forth through the broken limb, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with a sweet cure, and sew underneath the sense without the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so that it may be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Do not stop doing this just so long as the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be near death, and lacks breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then touch the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and they inhale through the wound, and thus are protected from death; and therefore the old man commands to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it will have passed in three days or four. And then he commands to sew up the wound and cure, until it is cured; and I shall tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden held the cautery, and thrust it into her throat, and burned part of the sinews behind the arm; and I was called upon to cure her, and found her almost dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that was issuing from it, and I knew well that it had not been properly covered with a bandage or dressing other than the throat, and the veins were pouring out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured her until she was healthy; and it did not take long for the maiden to regain her voice, and afterwards returned to her usual disposition; because I saw that in the tailoring of the epiglottis there was no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a great abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women; and it has two manners: natural, and accidental; or naturally there is no obstacle.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental is in two manners, of which one is similar to a fatty tumor, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from a blockage of the artery; and there is fear, and it does not need to open the false fluxes except in the one that is small, and you try and search throughout the entire interior: if you find it as I do not see a fat tumor, and it does not penetrate at any vein, if you cut, if you cut like we cut the tumors, and you draw out all its coif, if there is none; and search very thoroughly, and cure it as it needs, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways of ours, which I will describe all the similarities; and now it is necessary that I explain all the differences that exist between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the patient is feverish and has a chill, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it has accomplished the putrefaction; then the fever and chill are restored.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the patient having no heat nor fever nor pain, and containing yellow bile, which is their own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a jaundice, and becomes thick; and are according to the same similarities, whether grey, or moist, and many colors are so as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to its form whether it comes from a chapter or a treatise which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inspecting the abscesses in us is that you take or more moist heat than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you feel that the instruments have pierced the heart, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the intervening matter, and take care not to cause harm.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	Here is the translation:
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if he remains still, the pain returns to him many times; and if it stays for a short time, and without grieving the wound, apply powders of corrosive water, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing aposteme ointments hot, and treat other treatments until he is healthy; and if the pain is great, cut the lips of the wound, and treat what injures within.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is swollen against you, or otherwise, hasten and apply the vitriol ointment, and leave it there for 8 or 10 hours, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that which has been removed from the navel.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of inserted instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are four squares that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle the apostemes of fistula; and they are also like the needles whose tips are cut, and are of citrin iron, or silver, or copper, and those that are yellow are more experienced for piercing the fistula wounds; and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of onions are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are onions that have two curvatures in three ways thus; and if there are onions that have three curvatures, and are thus of three ways; and if there are onions that have two curvatures, and onions with a single curvature only, and are of three ways; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of these instruments is sharp, and there are those that do not cut except from one part, which peels the nails, because one does not touch the vein or nerve; and these inserted instruments are the lancets placed in handles, so that the patient does not feel it at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and we do not use them except on charnut flesh, such as legs, arms, and limbs, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a fistula scraper, according to this form, to staunch blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes at the healthy spot that connects the veins, and the arteries, and sometimes one finds according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Here is the translation:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the sitting (or perhaps "of the seated" or "of the sediment")
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the sitting are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture must be treated according to this form, from line .b. to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment coming to that point so it becomes healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, do it as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound is full of pus, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is broken, and the skin above it is swollen, abscesses often occur, and similarly, the vein becomes inflamed and abscessed; and if you examine it thus, as it is due to the artery, the abscesses are long and profound; and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the strangeness; and when it is due to the vein, there are obvious signs of fear; and it is foolish to try to cure this abscess, especially when it is under the ribs and in the hollows and near the neck and many other places, and it is very great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must then abandon the treatment with iron, and the one who is at the head of the artery must also abandon it, and in the one who has inflammation of the artery caused by a blow above the skin on the loin; then open the incision as wide as an ounce, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, so that it may be discovered; then insert a needle beneath it, and make it pierce through to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then touch the place which is between the two ligatures of an intromissoire, so that the blood may issue from it, and be free from the abscess; then begin the treatment with gentle manipulation, until the ligature holds firm; then treat what is inflamed, until it is healthy; and if the abscess is due to the incision of the vein, you must hold in your hand what you can of the abscess, and insert the needle beneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have a double thread, so that you may draw it from the other side; then ligate the abscess, as I have told you, or with a ligature of one of the two parts of the thread at the head of the fillet; and if you doubt that the thread does not hold firm, insert another needle through all the threads beneath the entire abscess to the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in three places; then treat the abscess until it is free from excess, then treat the excessiveness of the blood and leave what is tied; then put on a dressing made of soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, and apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the veins
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, how abscesses come into the artery and into the vein, they come into the veins when they are injured, or by too great exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And it often happens to the joints and the two and in all places where there are joints, and it's the painful abscesses, and their color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when one strains forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it's not at all in the depth of the body, but beneath the skin; and it moves well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor beneath nor above, and that which is in joints cannot be cured by iron: perhaps it would contract by chance; and he who is in the head or forehead, makes the skin on the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscesses are small, then hold them with tongs, and cut at their root; and if they are large, then suspend from the groin, and scrape, then bone and assemble the wound to the suture, and care for it until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	the large hanging lips
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Here is the translation:
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I examine them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 oz., and the work of incision is that you observe if the patient's moisture is humid, and the color of the joint is pale and moist with subtle root; if you apply the spatula large, and be present with fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Because when cutting often occurs too great a flow of blood, and if you don't stop it, then hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease from tightening the thread until it holds the joint, and thus ends the work; and if the roots are thick, fear to cop at the same moment for the belly, but you can well cop half, then cauterize so it does not return; then cure the wound, and beware that you do not touch the tissue that is of faulty color and poor sense and little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of chancre hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the skin is on fire
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or crack in the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the veins, just as it has happened in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness; and if it is by the rupture of the skin and by the issue of the vein, if the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens into diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers, it recedes, and then returns, and by chance, it becomes narrower, and grows much at the entrance of the bath, and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is by windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the works are that you look to see if the appearance is by the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is in the intestine or the bouillon, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his arm straight and be fully extended; then sign above the swelling; then instruct him to sit between your hands, then go above the place where you have signed the entire circumference; then tie it with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk firmly, and make sure the vein is well-sealed; then uncover half of the abscess spread above the vein, and put your index finger in, and explore the intestine; if you find the vein taken, then release it, and put the intestine back into its proper place; and if you find the bouillon, then take it to the uncine, and remove the superfluity; and if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go gently above, then return to your work and take two needles, and put them in the filz, and put the two needles above what you have done in a cross that you make piercing; then extract the abscess from four places above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and let the place heal as long as it can, and separate the dead flesh by itself; or cover it when it is subtle and putrid, then cure what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place of what is necessary, and sew the place.
dou chancre	a chancre disease
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Here is the translation:
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in its place or where you can osteer, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make him healthier if he has manifest repletion, then anoint the patient with good health to perform the operation; then cut your incisions or tumor, and shave all parts, and remove all excess flesh without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb firmly in your hand or in something, and see that the blood does not make a contrary motion against the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize so that the blood is stanched; then cure with another cure until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already said in the division the similarities of hydropisy, and how the assembly of the water is done, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is clarified simply; and one should not touch with iron in these two similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this hydropisy similarity called "clarified" by medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you see the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides hydropisy, such as pain and solution of stomach and similar things; if you do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient is very virtuous, and they have no other disease except hydropisy solely, and it is not too young nor too old, then you must operate: lift the patient straight up in your hands, and the ministers press the stomach in the lowest part of the back, then take the spatula with spine according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let it be a point, and always avoid being so inside that it cannot come near the intestine when you make an incision, and do not let it bleed; then see if the dropsy is inclined towards the intestines: if it needs to be opened on the right side of the intestine III fingers deep; and if it is for liver disease, let the opening be on the left side of the intestine III fingers; and if it is for the spleen, let it be on the right, and do not let the patient lean on the incision so that the superfluous fluids do not flow to the weak spot; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand at all the space between the skin and the fascia as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or an inch inside; then pierce the fascia until the space comes near the vein, and that is the level of the water, then draw it forth, and throw away this instrument because that is its form.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a subtle silver tube, and it is of lead or of light arch, and has a small hole in the lower part; and where one side has three holes, III holes; and II on the other side, and I on the other; and the head is shaped like a pen, and this is the form of the incision that the writers cut with the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	at the top is the lancet, so that when the instrument comes to the water, then descend now onto the instrument; drain off then half or a third part, for if you drain more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit and his arm, or he becomes weak, or approaches death; but drain according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse; then touch the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the cord that obstructs the hole which is on the syphon, as I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then return the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw from the water a small quantity; do it every day, and guard against fooling around until there remains only a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt on the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the grave or dry heat, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and you dye from drinking; and the treatment of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Never is a child born who does not have holes in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits you then that it does not appear to pierce at all, the very subtle spatula according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put or make a hole in the subtle closure of the bladder, and tie it with a thread thus for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, so be it opened, and make urine, and then put it back; and by chance it does not suit, because the urine that comes forth does not allow it to close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Here is the translation:
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the passage in their body are blocked, for no one has the passage at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before they elevate their rod high; and they cannot be cured because the matter cannot come to the marrow, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is that the patients lie on their back, then they are placed at the head of the rod and the cope as well as the size of a pen, so that the hole appears in the middle, as it suits; and beware of the efflux of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, then stop the flow of blood, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times there are ulcers on the penis, and it is a bad appearance of foul lichen; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it is necessary that you take them with a subtle onion-like remedy, and clean and wash all, then put on a cotton dressing in an Egyptian ointment; then treat the ointment daily until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the swelling is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you must apply fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and the swelling is under the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the swelling that is inside first; and when it is sewn, then cure what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you cure it all together, the head of the rod is not assured that it will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come into his rod and in his groin; then you must remove all that is black and corrupt, then spread on an emplaster made of honey and flour which is made from the scorched skin of green pomgranates and veils, then cure with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a flow of blood comes out, then apply the lunar cautery in this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries help in two dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and at the corruption; and if the head of the rod is corrupted and retreated, then you must apply or conduct a canal of fluid from the rod, and pour it on the patient; and when the skin is rough at the end of the rod that has happened to those who have not been circumcised, either by wound or abscess, then you must scrape it with an instrument, so that the bonds are released, and the head of the rod is freed from all parts; and if it is a difficult thing to devise this, then you must scrape it with a spatula at the end of the rod and skin; then gently separate between them, and put a subtle drizzle of cold water on the soft part, so that it does not become rough again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not one of the least bothersome continuations, just like other wounds; however when we perform this work of our volition, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I wanted the largest part of the masters and the surgeons who performed circumcision around the thigh, and with forces, and in all a new incision; if they encountered the case because there are two tendons, and by chance if one cuts above and delays that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is slow, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is two days hence it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrodes the vein, and many times they are born thus that they have no need of mending and I wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mending which is done with forces to all the thread of wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the mundification is this: the two heads should be tender and should be piercing, and the heads should be as large as the equally matched main.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the mundification is when the heart within fails at the incision; then it is necessary that you extend to your finger, so that the eyes make an abscess; and the equal coping, and if you cannot hold with your finger, then take a holding, and then cope.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts for three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, then let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and the scabbing is light; then cope as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
dou retenement de l’urine	the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of a reed or a small tube, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and remove the superfluity of the reed and tie it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg white, and seat the patient on a stool, and raise the bladder and the verge with moist olive oil and water; then gently insert the syringe into the verge, until it reaches the root of the verge, then double the verge above towards the bowel; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient come to the voided thing, and this is not done according to this order unless the conduits or it was twisted; then stretch the thread throughout the entire reed little by little, and the urine follows the reed, then it is forced out, and make the urine flow; and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is alleviated.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the blood or fluid comes into the bladder, where it is collected, and you see distilled waters and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and that's its shape.
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if you have three perforations: two of one part, and one of another, as you see; and the veins are blocked because the medicine was not applied so well that it stopped the flow of sensation, if you can then treat the moisture, and apply where the master is; and when you have placed your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and pull out the pulling one inside; if you pull out the moisture with the catheter, and then strongly pull back the pulling one inside; if the moisture enters inside, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the subtle form of the cluster where one clusters the bladder: this is it.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and beneath is a thread or the ligaments are cut; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you want to clusterize the bladder, then bind it between the two breasts in the form of a double thread, and heat the small piece on the fire; then put the head of the clusterizer in the flow, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moisture comes out, so that the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread in these perforations, then assemble the circle as one assembles a deal, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and bind it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction of assembled medicines; and I have told the difference between the stone in the kidneys as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate with a cutting edge; and in the bladder, and in the rod; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety; and it appears suddenly, and the patient feels their penis, and they urinate frequently, and then become constipated; and many of these jumps are foundations; and it is easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in old people, and it's as youthful moisture, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a clyster, in order to remove all the foul matter that is in their intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders the piercing of the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and let them bend over and move downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it often falls down from the high part; then make them sit between your hands prepared, and their hands should be below their thighs, so that the bladder is entirely leaning downwards; then touch and feel inside; if you feel the stone in the space, hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall to the toucher from everywhere, moisten your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is weak, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and full of vigor; and feel its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, insert it at the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and feel it at the limit where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand lift the skin which is under the loins in the part where one makes the cut; then he applies the spatula shaped instrument, so that it is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make between this which is between the hip and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight on the stone, and both are equal or foundation, and let the cutting be so large by default, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure if both which is or foundation, that it feels heavy labor; and know that there is part of the stone where there are angles, and margins: if it is difficult to remove; and if there is a part which is underneath, similar to a pebble, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	If there is a part where there are angles and margins, make the cutting larger; and if it does not feel heavy, then you must extract from the tenons which are like a file at the head, to carefully remove the stone so that it does not escape; or you put beneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, enlarge the hole of the perforated stone, and if the blood flows out, stop the bleeding with vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract forcefully, and the small ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it requires more careful treatment, and causes greater wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	Because these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out immediately because the bladder cannot hold it back; but nevertheless you should try to treat him, or clear away the clots, as much as you can treat them in pieces; and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it steady, and put on a dressing made of soft oil and wine, or soft oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then reset the patient on his pillow, and do not disturb the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, rise very well the level of oil and water, then treat with ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it be healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and so retain the urine, which is known in such a way that without sound with the urine: therefore put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and make it rotten; then lift the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in all ways that you can, so that he may be healthy; and it is necessary that all the openings that you cure, that you tie the two hips, and assemble the medicines on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot flow out; if you heal what I say, that you cut many times, it is excused from cutting by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a forest of iron in this form and let it be at .iij. angled points fixed in the tison:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the rod below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the filigree into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone; and turn the filigree with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can perceive the stone from another part; if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this because of something that is defective, then tie the thread below the stone and another above, then make the rod straight where the stone is between the two ligatures, then extract it, and untie the ligature, and cleanses the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes it happens that the stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens often, then the cure is grievous, and is prevented by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well acquainted with herself, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the skin of the woman is more fragile than the skin of the man, which is why it requires deeper cutting, and there is great fear therein. And if you need to ascend to that, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman who knows well, and touches the vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask I cast a subtle gaze; and present a wise old woman in the life of women, where a woman who knows a part of the art commands that she does what you command of the interrogation of the skin; and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then she must put her hand or foundation and search for the skin; and if she finds it, then constrain beneath her hand, and recommend that she puts her hand or with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	Here is the translation:
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the symptoms to recognize the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the wound does not heal, place a vitriol ointment on the sore, and keep it there for an hour until the wound is stained; then return to your work, until the stone is loose, and use the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as remedies for you to aid in your operation; and if the wound does not heal, and it is from a blocked artery, place powder on the sore and hold with tents and bandages, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it anymore, lest by chance the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the flow of blood is appeased, and the wounds are purified, then return to your work, until the stone is broken.
de hernie carnouse	of a flesh wound
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Here is the translation:
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this arm is from weakness that comes to the joints, and is expanded that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And often if there is percussion on the hips, and this moisture has many colors: whether it declines to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery pale, and this happens more; and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, because if it is white or syphacian as we have said, then it is a reeking abscess, I think for a long time as it appears in the figure of an egg, and does not open the hips, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper fabric, it is the abscessed swelling with a part of the egg-white, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white surface, it feels very good; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you examine the entire quadrangular intromission, from which the form is thus presented.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the inner corner, judge from what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he sits on his back, on a somewhat high thing, and much drapery is placed under him; then he sits on his left side, and instructs the minister to sit on his right, and extends the rod to one of the two costal ribs of the joints; then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the joints down to the long muscle just up to the pointed finger, and make your incision quite straight in cutting the skin of the joints up to the white surface, and scrape subtly according to his power; then pierce the plain water with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put on your onions, and extend the surface above; and do not touch the ribs of the joints, but only the surface; cut everything or in pieces very subtly, so that if you do not cut well, the water will return; and if the egg-white flows out abundantly, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the surface; then assemble the two leaves of the ribs of the joints to a suture, then cure as for other wounds, until he is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the fluid corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you raise the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decrement of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspended parts, and remove the fluid, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a soft ointment in rose oil; and put another soft ointment in wine and oil, and put on the two joints, and put double drapery over it, and tie it with all the linen that is according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two draperys, and fill them with linen charcoal according to this resemblance and assemble them by sewing into the girdle of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold on the foundation just up to the back, and another at the part of the thumb; and another head on the two angles, and all is assembled in the loop of the arm; and often medicine is applied with this cautery iron, and it is that you take a subtle surgical cautery, and cut the skin of the joints, and be careful as we have said, so that the white surface that contains the wound is uncovered; if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that surface as onions, and burn with this subtle burning cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And you examine in all the ways that you can, as much as you stretch; and beware that the fires do not touch the vein; and know that this work is more salvaging; and be aware of the deterioration of blood, and worse than the operations of size; and if nothing makes you contrary, or abscess bursts or deteriorations of blood or another thing, cure what makes you contrary, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that aquose water is there, then seat the patient on a high chair; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the spatula, and put the perforation at the end of the instrument; and make the openings large, so that all the water flows freely; then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it flow for the remainder of the water, then cure until the wound is healthy; and if the blister does not allow the water to issue from the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a pen or instrument through which one draws out the water of hydropics, whose form is thus before; and enlarge the wound, and know that the water returns, and it will be assembled after six months or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Here is the translation:
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from corrupt humors, and similarly from bad habits; and it is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It's about knowing the excess of bitter and acidic humor, which is spread throughout the body, or from percussion; and it's the color of the abscess according to the color of the corpse; and there's no finding point of pain, and it's a grievous abscess; and by chance some abscesses are greenish and piercing, and of fixed color, and sometimes they come from swelling of an artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it's from swelling of an artery, it's known by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press on it with your fingers; and it doesn't matter if you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those that are made from inflammation of a vein are known by their disposition to the expression of finger touch, and one can well make an estimate about this similarity, and on the other parts; and it is that you cut around the heart of the joints, then the egg-white appears above, and the trajectory falls from the white skin, and delivers the suspension from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is suddenly swollen with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you treat the vein, and the scalpel; and if it is affected by the syphac, or in those which are within the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of this tension, and the scalpel returns.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is behind the true skin, it is necessary that you cut all of it, and extract the skin, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of warm oil and rose wine, and afterwards treat with other treatments until he is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	These are enveloping abscesses with an envelopment similar to a burden, with the softening of the sides, and the patient suffers greatly when it worsens; and the cure of this disease is well almost as painful as this one before, and we will describe the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a raised seat, then bind them with suspensors at the sides below their buttocks, to all the vessels that are near the verge, and tie them firmly, and stretch them out forcefully; then cut with a spatula trenchant widely through the vessels, until they are discovered, and then strip away from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then fix a needle or thread double, and tie it to the first vein where the vitellus appears, and tie it again to another vein; then cut exactly in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt humors; then cure the wound as with others, so that no vessel is damaged that nourishes one of the sides; for by this there comes no harm, and if all vessels come together, it is necessary to treat the sides at all vessels; so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of the Syphac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Here is the translation:
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the affected section of the swelling, which causes sudden severe pain at its onset, and there are various abscesses appearing under the skin nearby, and this is due to the issue with the intestine and body from the failure of the swelling.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it settles beneath the intestines with the intestine, and is retained inside, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, because they think they will be harmed.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is it cauterized beneath the skin as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of deterioration of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Here is the translation:
de hernie carnouse	of a flesh wound
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done thus as the broom which is assembled at the vigour, in such a manner that you lift the vessels, after cutting lightly beneath the skin; then gather in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who have swollen, until the vessels heal; and cure as we have said, until they are healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Never does a rupture occur in the entrails, as we have said, and opens the loins; and do not touch any of the intestines with your fingers, and if you touch them, it is little, and repair all hours; and always if it remains too long at this point, the wound or syphilis increases, until the intestine ruptures; and this occurs through the extension of the syphac which is in the entrails, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and inflated the loins and opened; and the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and never is a cure made with iron in this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, then take the loin of the ruptured entrail according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the syphac which is beneath the skin that is swollen, then take the ruler and place it on the apparent loins of the syphac; and press at the bottom of the belly, then cut the two apparent loins of the syphac on the ruler's head, and cut one and the other; then extract the ruler's head, and do not touch any part of the syphac that does not extend to another thing, as I have made you aware in the cure of the ruptured entrails; then the cure is by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if it is diminished and cures the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The face is constrained, and has no appearance in the ruturation, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the thighs is softened in some men, because the flesh that is within is mollified, and it is a pleasant sight; and it is a masterful task, when one wants to cure it, to make the patient sit on his back, and to cover the skin that is mollified with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips at a seam, and if you see, first remove the superfluity of the mollified skin at .iij. seams or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the seams, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy, and sew the thread.
dou chastrement	of the chastening
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that cauterizations are scorned in our law, and for this reason I would have preferred not to speak of it in this book; and it is not necessary to force it except by two means: one is that the masters respond to it when asked about it, and in the same way they cure; and the other, because we often make use of cauterization on certain beasts to aid us, such as goat and sheep and deer and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that cauterizations are made according to two methods: either by attraction or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we make by attraction, we make ourselves sit in warm water, so that the joint becomes softened and flexible; then take them in your hand, so that they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des hermofrodites	of hemorrhoids
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Here is the translation:
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is with women, and it is on the little finger like a rod and they bind.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of men and women is that you cut off all the adjacent flesh, and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of their thighs, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tetany
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tumor is a flesh growth on the natural part, as much as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you touch the superfluousness of the tumor with your hand or with onion, and cut lightly; and do not go too deep in fear of blood coming, then treat another wound as long as it is healthy; and to another sore that grows at the mouth of the marrow, and the putrid flesh, and by chance it jumps forth, and it is according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this reason the ancients called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It seems necessary that you take it, as we have said with the tents and the treatment until it is healthy.
de erratique	of the rash
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic it is when the nature of the woman is not well perceived, or the pertus is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident through disease that came to be; or it's through a chance encounter, or subtle and espoused dou syfac, and it was made deep in the marrow, or in the sides, or below, or wherever; and it defies conception, and pregnancy, and perhaps by chance the flowers have to come; and the knowledge of this is through the gaze of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swellings are quickly appearing, seek them in your fingers or in the vein.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle dou syfac, and it is quickly in the liver, hasten, and arrange thus: put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs; then stretch out the two liver forms, so that the subtle dou syfac is round, and is over the swellings; then take a thread, and wind it in oil, and put it on the spot, and guide the woman to do this each day, so that she cannot be pregnant.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swollen area is hard and thick, it is necessary that you apply the spatula-like instrument similar to a foil of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the suppuration is of new flesh, then they suspend the onion and the cope; and among the medicines that staunch blood, thus as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, assemble abundant use of egg whites; then apply a large plaster of poultice, so that the wound cannot suppurate; and thus it remains for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen; then be cured by other cures until it is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marrow new flesh comes, then it is necessary to cover according to this manner, so that it does not become an encrusted abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the encrusted abscess which is in the marrow, one should not touch with iron.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Here is the translation:
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thethumb, when they are deeply embedded in the marrow, and do not appear to sensation, if it is not the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, afterwards stretch out the tendons, and bind it to its roots, then powder with medicines that restrain blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet in warm water for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if the flow of blood comes, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galen, and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and apply the plaster to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stifles, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, then make ventouses on the back and limbs without touching the skin; then take a liniment, and mix it with juice of plantain or juice of angelic with old wine, and apply it to the limb.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess breaks, heal the limb with ointment until it is healthy; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough chief, so it must be covered as I have said before; and then heal it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess come in the marrow, such as cancer and piercing abscess and herpes and swelling and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have said in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary then that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that gather pus; and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscess is agitated at the beginning of its coming, and full of bitterness and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make the swelling subside until the pain is alleviated; and then seat the patient on a chair, and have them sit with their small legs crossed, and support themselves on their back and bring their feet together in front of the leg; and let their hips be spread out, and place their arms under their knees, and bind them well with a linen bandage; then suck out the fluid from the right side, and adjust the instrument through which one operates on the mouth of the marrow, so that afterwards it takes shape; and you must, when you see fit to operate this instrument, first make a trial incision to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not go too far in and hurts the patient; and if the instruments are larger, then you should cover the depth of the marrow with drapes, so the instruments do not harm; and you must place the horn of the instrument above, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one makes a poultice with the softest part of the hand, if it is necessary to cover the head, with a spatula-like instrument; and when the wound is empty, if it is necessary to put in the wound as many moist compresses as possible in rose oil or green wax; and apply the compress firmly over the wound at the edge of the marrow, and apply beneath the marrow and on the affected limb a clean compress without moisture or bad humors; then cure after two days of applying, until it is healthy; and never lift the marrow and wound by irrigating with water and honey, and then with water or radish roots and long aristologe so they are cured; then return to the applying.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is set in the marrow, it is necessary to beware of burning with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	from birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Here is the translation:
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it often happens upon his feet, and happens to the body or head, and hands, whether it happens upon his belly, or swelling, and is converted by chance over his neck, and through other bad figures; if it is necessary at the treatment that it be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one must aid him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes out of its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a chair, or let the women hold her; and raise its nature from oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the midwife between her two little spatula-shaped fingers, which is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and bind the second one, and cut to his finger as much as the moisture that is in the running flux; and take hold of the belly of the woman as much as the children descend, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with a poultice of fenugrec with oil of sisament; then make her take and stir with condition, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour: if now the children will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands are swollen, it is necessary that you reset them lightly little by little; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a chair, and raise her feet high up; then remove the chair from the ground, and hold the woman so she does not fall while getting up; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant dies, cut the hands at the hollow which is situated before, and extract the infant, and reset evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child onto its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to hold it upright; and then turn it little by little, until it is even; then take one of the feet and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps just to the hips, instruct to grasp, and make it straighten with condition; if it jumps forth, then God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump forth as we have said, if it turns little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, take a mustard plaster, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in the mortar; and put it on the woman's nature within and remove this ointment, then make her sit in hot water until beneath the ribs; and when she is softened beneath, make her wear a myrrh collar, and put it beneath, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on the stool, then make her lean back and hold her mouth and nose, and take the belly lightly, for now the fetus will come forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the escape of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the fetus comes in this form, put the basin under her hands little by little; then let it slide onto her neck, and hang the feet down, and settle on the bed; and fold her hands little by little, and then take her hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from beneath, so that she is arranged below; and if the fetus does not come forth, take its feet and move them gently, then move the belly upwards, then put your hands; and rock the child little by little; and instruct the woman to push as much as the fetus comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth of the child who comes out with one hand while
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must prepare to reduce the hand: if one cannot reduce it, make the woman get up and walk; if she cannot walk, make her sit on a bed, and bend her legs forcefully; then I will manipulate the muscles as I have described; and if she does not improve, make her sit in a chair, then try to reduce the hand again; and turn the infant according to its natural shape, and make it straight, and command that it take hold firmly so that the infants are strong.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the rising of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face is turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I must make the patient hold their hand, then turn it little by little, and move it lightly; and when it is even, place on it the natural muscle alignment of above and below, as we have said, then command that it moves little by little; and when you have done this, make them sit in a chair, and command that they take hold; and make it straight.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for all the secondary (parts)
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it happens in this manner to the entire secondine, if you touch the secondine with your finger, so much that the moisture is emptied; and if the infant places itself on its face and on its neck, if you touch the belly, so it is not retained, and kills the infant; then put the child inside, so you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman that she should not take it at any time: then if it is lighter.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Here is the translation:
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	They are strange things, and do not live, if you name them little; I know that, for they should be multiplied, and are divided by the syphac who deviates them, which is tied to the belly; and no one issues naturally like all of us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue grievously, the cure is as we have said, and let the subtle balms be, and do it gently and lightly what it does; and do thus as it is worth to bring salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Here is the translation:
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	Here is the translation:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then apply the iron to another spot, where you are in control of the trade, so that the extractions are even; and then they settle evenly on both sides, moving back and forth, to make the spots issue forth, and the iron should hold firmly, just as it is the form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it remains in one part, anoint the affected area with some of its oily drops, and apply them to that part, and treat the other part; and if it does not remain at all, place this iron higher up or above, and do so until it is completely freed.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be reduced due to the stiffness, then you must envelop it in a bandage, until it is completely straight; then apply a bandage around the joint of the sole or the heel, and thus you should do with the other hand, as with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted in the issue, or it has an assembled acute chief, then it is necessary that you place the spinous spatula between your two, and make the chief and extract the acute; or you take it to the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one; and thus you do similarly for the children having a large natural head; and then treat the bones as tenailles, and if the head is twisted and it holds onto the forceps, so be careful, until the moisture that is in the worst issue; and if it cannot come out, so cut it into pieces at the muscles where you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as far as the moisture corrodes.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he falls on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the remedies at the mouth of the marrow are light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is twisted in the belly or in the worst, then it is necessary that you stretch it to the drapil enveloping it with your hand; and make the belly or the worst, until the moisture that is in it corrodes; and if the other members are stiff, and the head remains, then put the ball of your hand in front of the marrow, and treat it just up to the mouth of the marrow; then you put the ninth or tenth, and treat it further; and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by a hot abscess that has come, then it is not necessary to travail, but rather to administer moist and greasy things; and the administrator places enemas, and thus in an acute softening and moisturizing.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, so amend what we have said in the living child; and if one cannot have power, if one treats them by parts, and does not leave anything of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, amend what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow; and if a flow of blood comes, let it be put into a warm restrictive bandage, and amend other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb an infant had died in, then she conceived another on top of that, and rejected the dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long tension came an abscess in the belly, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to great putrefaction.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I place on an emplaster of strong attraction, and there issues out a bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel very much, because this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I touched the wound, and I felt with my hands, until the woman was in a better state; and I watched over the woman for a long time afterwards, and sucked up a little of the swelling from her body; and I did not recall this chapter further than that, because when the masters find an extraordinary thing, they know how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the thigh to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the presser, to which one adds the books; and at .ij. turnings as .ij. heads of the ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	In any case, the horns should be more subtle in their restriction, and made of ebony or boxwood; and let the mouth of the container be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees as it should be, and a palm and a half long; and within these two ligatures of the same container, which are fastened on one side and the other, by half a palm in length or a little more; and these two ligatures are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Here is the translation:
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the mirrors have appeared to them, so much is hastier the work, and higher at home according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared to it, for their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained in childhood, then you must instruct the patient to hold their wing, and then make them stretch out their condition, and hold your hands on their mouth and nose; and if they cough through this, it's good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take the pot, and make a pertus or cup, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calendula, rue, aniseed, chamomile, cassialigne, and centoire; all these herbs, or some of them, are cooked or boiled in water over fire; then put one cane or pertus from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow, and hold it as long as the vapors come out from the marrow; then make them stretch out, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary inflammation hurries.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not flee, instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or mussels, and then put it in the nature, and seeks the secondine; and when they have found it, take it and extend it little by little directly, so that the marrow does not slip out at extraction; but you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw; if it comes and is dislocated.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have said the treatment of sternutum, and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not respond to all that we have said, beware lest you do not fall into the trap; but it is fitting that what is at the mouth of the womb, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then anoint with ointment tetrafarmaçon; if it will settle and stay, it will come forth; but however, when it settles thus, a bad odor comes from the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second one is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to be seen as similar to a dog, and place the subtle head in nature, and the wide jaws over the fire; and let there be fumigations on the coals, and the teasing until it is exhausted, and recommend another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have a perceived foundation, thus it is stopped up subtly: so it is necessary then to apply the poultice that perceives it thus to its finger, and does not perceive it with spatula agut, and gathers the laying that it does not touch; then put on a moillie lane in wine and oil, then the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not recover, then put or apply a poultice of plant material, and leave it on for days, and be removed when the infants want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess comes; it is necessary to cover that suddenness: if it is cured, if we have spoken of the treatment of a piercing wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from its foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Here is the translation:
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod, and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula in the foundation, and does not miss it: and it is that you put your right index finger on the foundation, and put a subtle needle of copper or iron in the fistula when there is no twistedness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twistedness, you put a subtle probe of lead, or horsehair, until you feel the probe or hair on your finger; and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from pertussive egestion nor ventosity nor ver, as we have said: know that it does not pierce at all; so hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is piercing just next to the bladder or next to the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just to the joint of the thigh, then the probe comes just to the place; if there is no twistedness and the invention of the pain therein, then it is that it is already bowed, and no medicine nor sudden remedy by ointment; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through labor, and vanity of the foolish doctors who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In one who is not entirely perspired and is not entirely ancient, there is hope of health through fire, as I have experienced it, and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his knees, and bend his knees towards his belly; then apply a gentle touch of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tenderness comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it in the depths, then you must put your index finger there, and soon you will feel that the tenderness has been perceived; and discover where you feel between your fingers the skin or flesh, then know that it is perspired; if you don't work on it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can barely heal any of them, but it happens rarely; and the aid that one makes, if it is to heat the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before; and apply it all hot in the fistula, until it reaches deep into the depths; and do this two or three times, until you know that these worn-out skin folds are dry, which resemble a bird's feather; and then treat the wet tenderness with poultice, until that skin is dry, then treat with ointment, softening and soothing the skin.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is thus, it cannot be healthy; and if you hold between, and do not perceive just to the finger which is at the bottom, and between your finger and the hold a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula that shows the covering of the vein; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and apply beforehand the hold, and then the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the hold; and the hold will be delivered, and will fall; then remove those decayed flesh that seem like a bird's feather, and none will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood does not come to you, and it is short between you and the vein, then cauterize with fire or with medicinal water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cauteries assemble two things: it is to know, the art of combining those decayed flesh, and the drying of blood and the purging of moisture; then the treatment of wet wounds in mud or in crushed coal, until the limbs open widely, and the decayed flesh opens into the wound; then treat the wound of festering ulcers by applying dry medicine, and these are the dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near the deep foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes they are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side where the foundation of the skin is above the leather, if you take a tender point at the top according to this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And thrust it deep into the fistula until it reaches the head, and thrust the tent entirely along the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that perforation, so that you push your finger or foundation; and draw out the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for a day or two; and restrain it sometimes, until the threads grasp those things that are between them, and cicatrize; then cure the wound until it is soldered and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pass, if you make it pass in all the ways that you can, so it is not too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not seem to make a copper plate for the ulcer's dressing, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spiny spatula with which one makes the fistula is very awkward on one side and cutting; and on the other side not, because one does not grasp what one should not grasp, as you see here.
des emorroydes	of the emproys (possibly a medieval term for a type of medical instrument or procedure)
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Here is the translation:
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the dryness of the veins or base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of feces in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to reset a dislocated finger or toe, which does not allow it to become moist; then treat it until it becomes stable if it is necessary; and if it cannot be stabilized, then restart the treatment more forcefully than before, until it heals much, and is scarred; then treat it until it is healthy.
dou fremit	you excrete
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Gangrene is a small, faulty appearance that eats away at the body, and it spreads much in depth; and often one finds the coldness, and feels it as if dead from numbness, and it comes to all of the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a thread of an eagle's feather, or a strong vulture's feather, and place that thread on the numbness, so that the circles surround the numbness entirely; then turn your hand around the entire thread, and insert it deeply, and scrape out the numbness from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a tool in the form of a cane or iron, and be subtle below and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not prick, for you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the affected area, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of theclyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a clyster of silver or copper, or of tin or lead alloy; and never use these small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that one prepares for the treatment of children who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large clyster is above, wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there is a separation where the intestines are tied, as you see, and the head is perceived within; and have on one of the sides II punctures, and in the other I; and let the intestines be where one puts medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be totally surrounded by small punctures, and have between each puncture I thread of space, then put in these punctures I strong twisted thread in X or within, and assemble the intestines as if it were a basket; and when the medicine is inside, if you bind to the instrument before with a strong thread, then tighten; and that's the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or egg yolk, or similar thing, then put it lightly; then sprinkle the minister's hands together, so that it is totally visible, then extract the clistere, and lift the patient's legs to the parapet, and if the medicine wants to exit, let it exit as much as it can; and if it sleeps one night entirely, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat the patient for a disease of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to be absorbed, then recommend it as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the morrow is at the foundation, or an abscess, it should be the subtlest cluster, as for a child; and that's the subtle form of the cluster on the skin where the skin should be held steady:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatments with hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	Things that wounds are made by are a blow of stone, and a cut of sword and of knife, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or similar things; or those that are made according to the laws of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance will come into its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, beware if it is from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely broken and the wound is great, and you doubt the presence of an abscess: if you make it quickly healthier by cephalic means if little blood comes out of the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part; and avoid the patient's repletion with wine and coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to be healthy, if his food is diminished, and he does not drink wine, nor eat meat; and put on the wound, if it becomes apostemed here and there, cotton soaked in rose oil or in wine steeped; and if there is no aposteme there, if put on the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little about later; and if he has moved his arm, if put on some ointments, until it be healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, such as a sword or similar wound, and the edges cannot be assembled by themselves, then assemble them by suturing, as I will say for wounds of the belly, concerning the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is uncovered by the bone, and it is shallow, and holds only for a short time, if it suppurates; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse food, like you test and cook thoroughly, as with roasted meat, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find a wound with putrid matter, and it does not adhere to the bone, cut away all the putrid flesh, and pour on water; then cure. And if it has entered into the wound or vein, without delay, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, seek out the artery, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in this way that the arsenic has not moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method of the powder is this: take incense, one part; dragon's blood, two parts; living chalk, three parts, and grind it subtly, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap; then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, so it does not inflame; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And often one makes a poultice of hot ashes when there is no incense nor the blood of dragon, but only that the wound has not been treated.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arsenic has moved into the wound, similarly in this case, if you do not put this powder; but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, so that it throws out pus; then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then I will teach you subtle pincers; and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between this one and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, then there is no other engine than to leave the treatment, and not put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put on the wound anything cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but be the soothing medicine, such as hot water with sweet oil, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it in hot water, and other mine preparations according to this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, thus lay on bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and it is uneven and full of swelling, then pierce or cut below the level; and if the artery is severed, and blood flows out, then cauterize to stop the bleeding, and bind, and apply a ligature; and if the spine of the throat is severed, or the veins, and the conduits are watched, so that the flesh goes, if you cut the vein on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape; and then hold steady, and leave for some days, then cure with ointments as long as it takes to be healthy; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then dig; and if there are pieces of bone, then remove the broken fragments you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound closes, and is dry and light on the surface; and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle with the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from a wound of a lance or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or dagger, and the wound is deep, then examine the wound to see if there are any ventosities that the patient does not feel: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage so the blood does not stagnate within, and it returns to the heart, and kills the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and reapply it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, then put much cotton on the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so there will be no spasms, nor bad tremors of the heart, nor strange movements of the limbs; and when you see good dispositions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Here is the translation:
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or on the chest or back, if the treatment of what is in front; if it is large, with stitching; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in covering pieces, so that the wound heals, and the traits are fresh if they are aligned; and if they are not aligned, then let the wound putrefy, then ease the extractions; and for other wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Here is the translation:
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the belly are large and medium and small; from a large wound sometimes the intestine is hurt, or the nerves of the intestines, because of their introduction; and the stitching is more painful, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one, because they put the intestines back in place more easily, if they are not put back in hot water; for when the intestine swells so much that it feels cold, it returns more easily, and thus it is better to have a moderate wound, because they reset the intestine to its place like other II And know that the rupture of the belly is according to IIII manners: the II common stitches happen in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds on the body and II other proper stitches are common to other wounds; and anyway they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and a grievous thing is to put it back, this is by one of two manners: either through the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is frozen, warm it up in this manner: moisten a sponge or a cloth with lukewarm water, or you cook in lukewarm water and cypress and spike, and raise the intestine until the swelling is gone; and no time make it restrained again, and it is more dead than alive from being deflated.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestine with lukewarm water or lotions and evil humors are cooked, for by this the entrance is alleviated a little; and if it cannot enter, make a little opening in the wound to cope with the hemorrhoids; and the first cure is more dead than the incision, that we should not incise without great necessity; and this is the instrument for cutting: if you cut within the curve and do not weaken, and see here the form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, you will have the power to do so, for this is worth much.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, you should make the patient sit on their back, and put their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, you should raise the head and chest higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two regions, you should arrange it so that the injured part is higher than the other; and thus you should manage what I say about large and moderate wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, take what you have prepared, then hold it between your hands and minister gently, so that you tighten the entire rupture with your hand, and bring together the lips; and this is the common method of suturing, and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound a space of two fingers, and insert a needle where it has a strong thread; and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the siphac, which is beneath the skin, as much as you make them pierce from that part, and bring together the two heads of the siphac three times; then tighten with a double thread around the needle of two parts, then bring together the two sides of the wound gradually, and then leave a space of two fingers, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did for the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to what you have need of needles, until the entire wound is restrained; and be moderate needles, between subtle and coarse, for subtle needles take in all the flesh, and too coarse ones cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they are moderate; and do not push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they take in and open the wound before the suture; and then cover the heads of the needles, so that they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put a tent or drapery over the heads of the needles to hold them in place for a long time, and leave them until the wound is sewn; and this method of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for it suffices to insert one or two second sutures; and when you have pierced these sides three times, then reinsert the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that they sew clothes; and put a space between each suture the width of a small finger; this suturing serves the man, and I treated a wound on a certain person who had a belly wound, which was injured by a knife, and it was more than a palm wide, and it had intestines two palms wide, and it was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I will remove the intestine then when it has been established for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up to 15 days, and I cured him, and he was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctor who had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not cure him with any ointment, because I was in a place where they didn't find any, nor any medicines; and I put cotton on the wound many times a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and sew the defective part up to the inner part; when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if you have stitched or sewn with the needle, and make it pierce another part of the defective inner part; and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch just as the pelterer makes the pellets, and that you leave one time the thread of one part, and take it up again from another, until the stitching is entirely complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of cauterization, which Galen described properly, is thus: as if no font, which assemble the two parts naturally, and apply one head to the other head, in such a way: fix a needle or head of a mirror adjacent, and make it pierce the entire limb, and let the two heads of the mirror; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the defective part up to that within, as the two heads of the mirror; then make it pierce one and the other from the defective part up to that within, in the other heads of the mirror that are on the other side; and this is the most common manner of cauterization.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this in his speech, and no one bears witness, that one should cauterize the belly with two needles, or it has thread in each; and one should insert one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds; and know that when the rupture is within the belly, it is a more grievous cauterization than on other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound in its entirety, even if the arrow has moved, then reset the intestine, and the gut; then put on a powder made from charcoal, and if the arrow has moved, then put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and cut the thread, and sew the skin, and the membrane; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healthy; and if you have no medicines, then put on, soon as it begins to heal, cotton much, and remove it twice a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not have mastery of another medicine in many dispositions where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not make common unity with the principal members, then it is necessary that you apply a light ointment in oil of temperate heat, or in oil of rose, and put it between the angles, and beneath the seats; and if there is pain or porridge in the belly, and often happens, then cleanse with wine vinegar tincture, and similarly if the porridge reaches just to the intestine; and pierce within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the delicacy of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approaching of its natural tendency towards nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the intestine jumps away from the wound, set it back in place like the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned towards yellow or black, then you must lay the black area that is being drained of blood, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ligament, and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound until you feel the extraction when the intestines pull, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the good intestine
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, then one can restore it in some homes, because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became swollen and turned into a fistula, and hindered digestion and ventilation; I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease from subtly treating until he was healthy, and the wounds healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him sweat, I doubted that the patient did not have a bad thing in his stomach; and there was no harm, but it remained in better dispositions, and they were eating and drinking; and certain experimentors said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such a way: take firm hold of large testes, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the firm hold covers the mouth, put it on both lips, so that it extracts its mouth thus; and then cover the head, and it holds itself so that it cannot dislodge, then put another firm hold afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely closed; and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the intestine is injured, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such a way: take the head of this intestinal thread which is very delicate, and then tie it to the head of the twisted thread, then put the thread into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reassemble it in its place; and this manner of sewing with firm hold is not done except according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, so there is no remedy unless subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Here is the translation:
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodation that it is hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also like the feather of a bird; and sometimes it appears clear, and sometimes dense; sometimes little, and sometimes enough; and I have already spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healthy, and there is no flesh, it is only by one of the eight causes: it is to know, by the small amount of blood or pus; or through its malice; or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much swelling; or the skin is porous, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or because the property of the region is slow digestion, and slow health, and weak by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by operation of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Here is the translation:
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	Here is the translation:
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or principal member does not grieve you, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so remove all the decay, then heal the things that are hurt so they may be healthy; and if it is not healthy, and return to the beginning, know that you were not able to be above: uncover and search until you reach the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the place; and if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this does not work, know that the decay is too deep, so you cannot reach it; if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature; and if there is a small rotten bone, and you can remove it with pincers, remove it with an appropriate instrument, and if there are many bones, remove them all, do not leave even one; and if the moisture makes you contrary, and there is no error or fear, then cut and scrape and separate, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot dislodge them within an hour, put something soothing on the wound to induce suppuration, and let it be until the abscess is ripe among the bones, and then they will have less difficulty with the bones; and if it's a large bone, such as a thigh or leg, remove so much of the corrupted tissue that the blackness is completely removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption and it reaches to the marrow of the bone; you must dig out and uncover all the way to the corruption, and then cure until it is fully healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	It was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the matter went to the leg and became inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to open it; but the doctor foolishly operated on it, and scraped away many matters, and it turned into a fistula, and there were many openings that completely drained the moisture from the body; and many doctors treated him for two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, so much that I was called in, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being cured, and what corroded through the openings of the large body; and the body of the young man became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I thrust a probe into one of these holes, and then explored all the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and probed into one of the holes as much as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption reached to the bone within; I saw what appeared to me from the corrupted bone, and believed there was no other corruption except for that which I saw; and I began to restore the wound with medicines applied slowly over time, but could not succeed; and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continued corruption in the bone, and saw it, and then removed it, and thought of suturing the limb; but I was unable to do so much that I probed into a palm of the bone, and cut away all its marrow, then restored it with medicines; and it was quickly healed and sutured hastily, and did not need to recommence the work for fear of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for fear of death which I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because the bloody evacuations often happen, but it was completely healed, and a hard crust formed on the bone of the bone, and was in good disposition and had no harm or contradiction whatsoever, neither in going nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner: take a bandage, and bind it around the top of the bone that is open, and instruct him to stretch it upwards; and put another bandage of linen, larger than the first one, on the crust that is above the bone, and hold the head steady, so that you extract the rotten flesh from below, and uncover the flesh over the bone where you see fit; and put a hot iron or a cup under the bone to clean the rotten flesh; and it must be treated until you can see and feel the corruption, and treat again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	Here is the translation:
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Here is the translation:
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Here is the translation:
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	Here is the translation:
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Here is the translation:
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the senses are troubled by indigestion after many days, know that the senses are not affected yet.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if you come subtle skin afterwards long tension, do not despair of health, for healthy approach.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are men who delay in applying remedies to their wounds, and those who do the opposite; and if they have indigestion, know that it is not because of the serum, but rather delayed aeration, which is forlorn, so apply medicines with moist substances and dry virtue, as we have diafinit ointment, since there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take diafinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and add old wine equally in substance; then confit and use it; and if this makes honey thickened, when diafinit ointment is not present, or take myrrh and aloe, and incense, and powder over the honey when it is on fire; and then glue the drapal, and spread it on the breast, and often administer aristological remedies long, and celestial roots, which are also like flour of vezes and centoire; and use them as simples or composites: powder them, and make them into powder, and put over the honey I mentioned, and use; and if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this cure, then know that corruption is in depth, and makes impression on the bone, or on hard members, or limbs; if the cure for fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Here is the translation:
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, it is necessary that you cut away all the superfluous tissue that remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is great aid if the bone is healthy, and the finger is healthy; and if the finger presses on the flesh within, and begins to point, and becomes white, it is necessary that you put the right cautery underneath the finger so it does not touch the flesh, and hold it high, and carefully and lightly remove the subtle and refined flesh, and apply remedies burning and corrosive to burn everything; then treat with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, remove it, and extract the decayed matter, for as much as the bone is corrupted it is, it cannot be healed; and if you see the decay corrupting, remove it from our sight as it was said before, then treat until it is healthy; and if it is fierce, and swollen, and it causes great pain, it is necessary that you heal it first; then cut away the finger with a spatula-shaped instrument, cutting transversely above, and beware that the cutting does not reach the flesh beneath the finger, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, apply something to calm it down.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that grow in the hands of some men by chance are completely fleshless, and by chance they have a certain bone, and sometimes they have a fingernail, and none of them grows at the root of the joint, where the growth is in no way from the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those that grow on a certain knuckle of the toe do not move, and those that grow at the joint of the toe, by chance they do move; the size of the one that is fleshless is light, in such a way: it measures at its root with a large spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold it softly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those that grow on the back of the toe, it is necessary that you cut the flesh around to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable size for that, then cure until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pains that come together come from birth, or from sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut the sinew, so that the toe returns to its natural form; then put between two tender or oiled cloths, so it does not become stiff; or you put between two pieces of subtle plaster, until the wound is closed, as it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If suddenly he comes to one of his fingers with the palm, if it is numb, as it seems.
des vils	bad hairs
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	They are gross swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic humors that come into many members of the body; and more often they occur in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary therefore that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the soundness of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is in two manners: one is that they cut, and draw out the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is according to this manner: first raise the leg with warm water very strongly, so that the gross blood is subtled, then hold the leg of the patient from above the thigh just to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three, with a large cut, then draw out and extract the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtue of the patient can suffer; and then bind, and instruct that they abstain from eating black coal; and recommence the evacuation and health when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vision is constricted and twisted and entwined together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must bend it straight, but do not cover it; and pull it as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron that one uses to cover the vision is curved, and does not cut, so it does not cover the vein; and it is of great curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cover the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is the shape.
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is generated in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that arises beneath the skin, as it comes within the body of serpents and worms, generating between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then the veins change, and the vein starts to issue forth, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the chest is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth one and a half inches up to two inches, and the knot, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it does not stay in place, if you wrap around the cloth, and the knot; and if it is too long, cut off part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut into its root, until it is all issued; for if you cut it, it returns into the flesh, and causes abscesses and putrefaction in the limb, and bad disease; because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains or festers; and there are often times when this vein is treated with five or ten inches of length, and a few men came to me who had it issuing from ten inches of length, and when you cut it, the reason bursts out or perforates, and pierces deeply, so that everything issues; and let the material that is inside be evacuated, and apply medicines to soothe putrefaction any day, then the cure is like the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And many times at this vein of the hand, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or of the foot itself, and a lot of pus comes out, and from which it jumps abundantly; cure it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of sores that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle, and is a small sore that grows between skin and flesh, and spreads throughout the body, ascending and descending, and one feels it well from member to member, until it reaches the skin or it falls, and jumps fiercely; and it is caused by the putridity of certain humors, such as worms and serpents and lumbrics and ascarides in the belly; and there is doubt about its malice, for when it spreads through the body, and it rises to the head, and it reaches the eye, by chance returning, and destroys the eye; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the patient and treat, if it cannot be cured otherwise: then it is necessary that you place the limb above and below with a strong lien tightly, then cut above and draw out forcefully, and if the vein is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire as much as it will die; and the greatest harm it does, is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly, then cut above, and draw out forcefully; and it is necessary to use the patient's mundification of bodily medicines solutives for evil humors porries, and beware of eating bad meat in a putrid manner.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm; and soon after, I saw it swell up like a worm at the shoulder, faster than anything, like living silver when it runs from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and attached itself to the shoulder, and then soon after spread throughout the entire body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it would often return across the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had seen many who wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not see it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and therefore appeared this constrained ventosity; and it did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and have moist bodies and responsive veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you want to cure this illness, and the patient feels that pain, it appears as we have said, if the lie is above and below hastily, and then cope with it so much that the wind constrains the place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes, if you treat what drives away the winds, like fetid pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they fall.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are those with large points, and small ones, and notched ones, and soldered ones; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where there are pieces; and that which falls on no principal member falls in two manners: either on a principal member it notches, like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the body falls into a bad state of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, appears: if it happens that you extract this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many ways; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not deeply implanted, then pull it out, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the signs of the brain when the arrowhead is in it and pierces the bone, and the syphilis falls which is on the brain, are scotomia and swelling and inversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it loses force from the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice; and falls into a white moist wound resembling a pustule, and falls also like a broken char; and if this sign appears, then hold back from the cure, and pull out the arrowhead if it is not in.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The signs of the wound when it falls or collapses, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in a hard thing, not at all empty; and by chance the wound moves like the pulse, and in short time black blood comes, and cold sweat comes, and fainting: thus without doubt one senses that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the wound that never heal are that without flat ulcers bursting from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold region.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the wound bursts in the covering of the piss, it is beneath the small ribs; and throws great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the sausage gut or stomach, by chance jumps from the wound any thing of undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the gut or belly, and it jumps not a point of wind by the intestine route, if there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the gut.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the gut is in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and the similar members, are safe according to several more dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because you should do the same.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that he had a wound or an abscess at the root of his nose: I touched it, and drew it from another part beneath the fat of the ear, and he was cured without any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I drew out a wound that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the skin beneath, and the wound was put back, and one could not touch except for the tip towards the hollow of the fist, and it was a large wound of an Turkish bow, with all the iron light without ears; the game was cured, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow at the ears: I sewed up the wounds, and subtly extracted it as much as I could, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I pulled out an arrow from a man's body, which was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die; and then after thirty days had passed, he showed no signs of improvement; I cut around the arrow, and extracted it with skill, and pulled it out strongly, and there were no bad consequences.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if I saw a man whose arrow had fallen into his back, and the wound was swollen above; and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor did I find harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was swollen; and it remained thus without him suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I treated a arrow in the hand of the prince's king, which had struck him in the nail, and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely stuck. I was called for treatment after it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I sought it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything; and it felt pointed and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I put on the wounded place a attracting and digestive plaster, because the wounds did not swell; and it appeared to me as the wound of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I kept the plaster on for many days, and the wound healed again, and the patient remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow a day later in his nail; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put the medicine on the wound with corrosive hands for many years, until it was opened and I felt it, and sensed the head of the arrow that had entered the flesh; then I adjusted in the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visible; and it went well beyond the terms within three months, and then I relaxed if the wound that I applied the tourniquets, and my hand on one side and the other, and could not issue; then I did not cease from subtly operating and ingeniously contriving devices, until I took it out in a day with well-made tourniquets, according to what its form would come at the end of this chapter, until I translated and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the mirror showed that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I then restored it, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Where you have spoken of the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, if you put your cure on what I do not say, for the books cannot grasp everything; but wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, in understanding the strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed, except in two ways: either by the direction of the limb or they enter, or by another part; and the one that jumps forth where it enters, it's an arrow entering into the flesh, and jumps forth many times now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous within, and the issue is alleviated; and also if it's fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and soften every day; and then it will jump, and if it doesn't jump, pierce within to the subtle forest, as much as the flesh within is enlarged, and then draw out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient: do not touch it, but let it be until it is even after some days, for if the arrow comes just so far, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed in the bone but only in the soft tissue, and does not come just so far, and the patient remains for some days without a bad accident, then it's time to remove it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very firmly fixed and cannot be removed, then I will administer tar-water around, as I told you; then heal the limb so that it may be healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the body so that it cannot be seen, then probe the entire area; and if you feel it, then remove it with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot do so due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve, then make the wound larger; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears that hold it in place, then cut away the flesh that is fixed to both parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can remove it; and be careful not to break the arrow, so that you can remove it more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, then leave it until the surrounding tissues are purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood makes you do the opposite, then diminish what we have said about the cure in his chapter; and beware of the incision of the nerve and of the vein, and do not think that you can easily remove the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow fell, for it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, then set it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or where it opens into something of it, or the skin is inflamed in that place if one sees or feels it; then cut around it, as much as the tongs can grasp, and then extract it: if it comes out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held back in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then leave it still, and then resume the extraction as much as it comes out; and if the remainder of the arrow is there, push it all the way; and if the remainder is short, and you need to administer a push, if you push the instrument curved, so that the point of the arrow enters the curve of the instrument; and then push out, and if the arrow is curved, push the instrument with the point entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut around the entire flesh where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it convalesces.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls in the hand or foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the side, and it is near, and you can cut above, so you cut; and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract, and then sew the wound, as is necessary; and heal until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the swelling resembles that of a bird's beak, for puncturing at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for cauterizing and for extracting if it is so:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which one bleeds, of which the head has XVI, it is to know: two veins that are behind the ears, called "herbech"; and two arteries that appear in the temples; and two veins that are in the eyebrows, called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose; and the two gullets that are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that one commonly bleeds are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and people call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fast", and it consists of the cephalic and basilic, and people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the pubic bone, and it is the one that is bled, which appears manifestly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and anular, and it has two branches; and in the leg there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side of the chest, and the second sophene which is at the knee on the right side of the chest; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the knee of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The health of the forehead vein is worth as much as the health of the cephalic vein in ancient diseases of the face, and in migraine, and in redness; and the quality is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, so that the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", which is this shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see; then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and no longer swollen from a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins that are in the eyebrows helps with the eyes, and the forehead, and redness, and the pupils in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the quality of their health is that the patient strains their neck by twisting without any bond, as before; then it heals, and let the health be from traversing, a little from the long flame a little large, for there is no point of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flesh is subtle, it may break by chance; then make a correction with blood, as much as you have mastery of it, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The wisdom of the two guindges helps with the straightening of the vein, and at the beginning of massage, and for many illnesses, and for epilepsy, and for corroding, and for herpes, and similar things; and the quality of the wisdom is that the patient stretches his neck one way and another, as we have said; and so the master stands above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair, then cleanses the vein with a slightly large movement, then draws out some blood moderately, or as much as needed; then does the same in the other vein, and loosens the ligature slowly, so the patient is not strangled; and leaves it until morning, so the wound may be healthy.
de la sainie des leivres	of the wisdom of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above the liver, if they aid in the accumulation of bad humors in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cracks of the lips, and painful gums and interior.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the wisdom is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the liver, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right side of the liver and the other on the left, and recognize them by their black color, and by the small black veins surrounding them: thus take one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, then take the largest of each part, and likewise make the two veins that are above and below, for it is a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the healer is that the patient puts between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side for a black vein: heal one and the other, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly healed are healthy in two ways: either by pricking into a large flame mirror, or by subtly feeling like a cutting scalpel, and it is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the largeness and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame burning is very renowned, and it is large as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins with a broad, flat scalpel that appears to contain much blood and turmoil; and this is the form of the olive-shaped flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for purifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with the illnesses that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly; and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed severely, and to beware of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and a lot of blood comes out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and one must not prick the flame, but cut skillfully as with an anvil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another; or you wish for some vein of it, or you bleed in its place the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly; and cut with the flame anvil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you want to examine the place of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the place as much as you know the pulse; then mark the place with a needle, and then tie up the arm, and cover the vein with a flame in a gentle manner; and beware that you do not strike into an artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of an artery: avoid it thus.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rise up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery: hurry then, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the blood stops; tie up the arm, and let it be, and do not move the patient; and be without fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the vein is not stanched, and it fails you, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins; and staunch the vein.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a dressing of fat, and make it, and take one of the many and place it exactly next to the other yesterday; if the wound is stagnant, that's good; if not, then cure, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood; and the staunching is not troublesome in more dispositions for the small wound of the arm, and the possession of the string of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The health of the vein is in a good state if it helps to draw blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of basilica and cephalic, as we have said; and it is necessary for the healer to be aware of the nerve that is below, and if he presses too hard, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the health is troublesome, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any houses due to its subtlety, then it is necessary for you to heal the instrument of the anvil; and chase away the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if it has a vein between the muscles, then they make it flow far away.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The sanity of the head is helped when it draws blood from the chief vein and helps the eyes; and one must bleed at the flame-shaped olive or flame-shaped martian, for it is the safest of all the veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, one must choose the lightest vein, and not cause any grief if it fails the first time, and one starts again; and by chance, one inflames the veins in some men, when it fails the first time, but it does not cause any grief.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bleeding, is that bleeding is not done for fun except to preserve health and to prevent future diseases; and so the bleeding should be done in one of the three veins which are at the cost: it is to know, cephalic, fastic, and basilic; and one should bleed at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when signs of repletion appear; and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The healthiness that is administered to the sick has no fixed hour determined, but when need is of day or night, in all hours and at all times; and it does not suit to heal children until 13 years, nor a woman carrying fruit for less than seven months up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor do they become healthy healers the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone wants to be healed, in whatever way it may be, they must first purify the intestines with a gentle laxative, if they retain much of evil humors, so that the veins do not attract superfluous and harmful matter into the principal members; nor does one heal those who are too full of food, or drunkards, as long as they are furious, nor hysterics; and beware of healing after colic passion, and vomiting, and decay of stomach, and multiple childbirth in a woman, and labor, and watching, and fasting, and all the virtues, either by means of arms or body or medicines, if you have much power; then subtly balance the humors, if the health is gross, through food and drink and medicine, if you can; then between baths, so that nothing disturbs them, to subtly purify the blood, and heal the vein of the foot inwardly, as we have said; and guard against the day of labor, and pain, and luxury, and similar things; and be joyful and merry, and let the healers be higher than those who are being healed, and rub the arm twice or thrice, then extract the limb gently, because when it is too stiff or weak, it cannot be corrected; and then rub the hand as much, until the veins swell, and feel them; then anoint the healer with a flame of oil, then put their left hand on the vein below the arm where they want to heal, so that the vein does not fail and falter in striking.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Here is the translation:
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it's good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the patient's eyes are inflamed and the patient is anxious, let them stay for a day or two, and do not bind their arm: perhaps abscesses will form there; do not insert anything, then resume the healing as it pleases them; and if the puncture is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not flow as much as you see, then make the same opening on the entire right side; and open a little hastily, so that the patient's eyes are inflamed; for this happens often, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the patient's eyes inflamed, do not resume the healing, and put a little oil of lily on it, for it alleviates the body's flow of blood, and is beneficial in this case where the oil is; and thus administer the oil of lily in each wound that you heal the veins, to staunch the flow of blood; and this same thing makes triacle and balm, when one puts it on the patient; if the blood is subtle and separates when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not healthy enough to be treated only at the time when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the limb a moist sponge in water and a little hot, and hold it for an hour; and you must do this after the blood flows from the vein, and if it remains on the limb after several days without any blackness or greenness, do not harm it; and if you see, put on some aloes or myrrh ointment in a solution of calamine, a masterwork, or similar things.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there appears an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft place at the pressure of the hand, then it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Beware that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance it cuts short without artifice; but the master makes a plaster to harden the place, then cures with another cure, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out until it is subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is suitable for one who is full and strong, and has a mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and let the flames be large; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and hold them more often and more subtly, and one must heal them by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of healing is free from corruption of blood and gathering of nerves, and is worth more than the healing of a long or large wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And to the one whose body fails at the wound, it is necessary to give a soft poultice made from juice of green apples; if he is overheated, then draw out three or four pints of blood; and if he is of a cold complexion, then administer before the wound a soft poultice made from musk syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints at the wound, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he have a broth made from beef, and subtle fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if you want to anoint his arm, and heal it another time, then it is necessary, when it is weakened by great bleeding, that he be anointed little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to anoint his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong pulse, then anoint at the seventh hour after the first bleeding, or at the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to heal another part, then one must anoint on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood inside the body which is already overheated, and brings on fever; if it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and enlarge the wound as much as possible; then you must observe all the conditions of the wound, and put your hand on the pulse when it wounds, so that death does not come into the body, and this happens many times, when the surgeons are negligent; and do not press too hard when you see the arm relaxed, and make blood issue a second time, and the wound is closed, you press strongly upon it; nor if it is bent, let it stretch out the arm hastily, for that would be bad; but let it bleed a second time; or you prick at the point of the flame, as much as the blood which is congealed in the vein issues forth, and put it on the point of the remissive water, and press upon it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not tighten it too much, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw out the blood a second time, let it be in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of bloodletting is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the veins become red; then they should be moderately tightened, so that the vein appears well, then the blood flows through it now, neither too wide nor too long; and the puncture should be large, and the bloodletting should be close to the joint of the hand, and if one cannot get out enough, then put the hand in warm water again, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough; and if it is in winter, do not repeat the bloodletting with the hand in warm water, for they put more into the fire than in summer; and the bloodletting of this vein is healthier than all other veins, since there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The bloodletting of the salvage vein of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is the method: hold the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen, so that you can see it; and if the blood flows through it now, and you cut it from top to bottom, do not cut too deeply, because the nerves are very close to the skin, and then put the hand in warm water again, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot get out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out the blood as much as you need, then put oil on the vein and sew it hastily, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the left hand is worth it to the disease of the wrist, and do all thus as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The remedy of the soporific is suitable for all the diseases that are beneath the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its remedy is that the patient drinks some warm water, and rubs on the vein until it perspires, and applies it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many waters go; therefore, one should give a large or larger draught, or at the ankle, which is more suitable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you sound above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and the vein of traversing also as in coupling; and let the flames be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sans cannot issue from it, put the foot in water, and let the vein be well purged.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the remedies fail at first, recommence the second above a little, because the joint is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the remedy of the other foot similarly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic leg is at the junction of the thigh, and its surgery is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of his sanity is that the patient stays in the bath, and holds the crutch IIII fingers while twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then the blood flows in all ways that you can, and crossing; and it is better that you take care of it, for the blood is healthy, and it is much restored to many homes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then blood flows from who opens or gives at the foot, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves; and make the blood flow as you see fit, and then release the bandage, and put on cotton and hold steady; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	of the bloodlettings of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Bloodletting instruments are made of horn, or of brass, or of glass; and bloodletting is done in two ways: either by pricking and attracting blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which is without touching if it is according to two methods: either it is with fire, or without fire; and the cupping that is done by touching and by blood extraction is done in 14 places of the body, of which one is all on top of the head; and one is in the neck; and two are on the sides of the neck; and the cupping under the chin; and the cupping of the two shoulders; and the cupping on the ribs; and the cuppings on the two arms; and the cuppings of the two legs; and the cuppings of the two ankles; and the cupping does not draw blood, except from small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one is not afraid to make a venous bleeding, as one does with a vein bleeding; and it is not necessary that it be administered, neither with fire nor without fire, in any disease that comes from excess, until the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to bleed, either by habit or because they are accustomed to it, if we bleed them every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and in every tense; for there are those who, when they have a master bleeder, have a heavy head; and if there are those who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and taste blood; and if there are those who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it's in the midst of the month, we command them to wait after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The health of the nose helps with the greatness of the head … which comes into their eyes, and it is not fitting that this should be after the evacuation of all the body; and this bleeding is in the place of the health of the cephalic, and it is not fitting that he who is of a cold complexion uses it, or who has a catharr, because this causes them great harm; and for this reason it is not fitting that the guardians use it, nor those who have a cold head or bad diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often sick, they become oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Here is the translation:
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventosations on the II costal bone, which alleviates pain of the head, and opthalmia, and migraine, and in the constriction, and in the pain of the roots of the teeth, and it is in the treatment of the basilisk's wound; and it is necessary that you instruct the healer to place their hand, so they do not touch the artery, and do not make a mistake in the flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds beneath the chin if they make a disease of the mouth, and a corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Here is the translation:
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventosations of the seams is worth as much as the III veins of the arm, because it attracts blood from these large veins; and instruct the healer that they should not make a too deep incision, because the flesh is nude of skin, and knows beneath the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping which is on the back is worth as much as emorroids from the foundation, and as maladies underneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of a certain size, so that it has mastery of well treating; and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cupping glasses on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the entire body, and relieve ancient pains of the loins, and of the thigh, and of the bladder, and recall the flowers; and are in the place of .ij. soporifics, and of .ij. chirps, and always they reinvigorate the body after long use, and bring forth pus in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	Here is the translation:
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize three times: the first time to subtly clear the way for the large blood flow.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time; and when we want to draw out the little blood bit by bit, then we suffice with only one application.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to draw much blood, we should recommend it often; and if the wound is narrow, we should make a deep incision, and the goal is that the cure should be perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick skin and hard, and who have stubborn pores, that you anoint the wounds with oil of opening and dissolving properties: if it is in summer, of violet oil, or almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, of cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of aniseed, and the similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it does not need to be touched with oil, but rather it needs to be washed after the evacuation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he rises from aisyli, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have gross superfluities are lifted with old wine, or with water of seaweed, or with a decoction of anet or chamomile, or with similar things; and it is not necessary to apply the cup before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for one or two hours; and do not sleep after the evacuation, and it is necessary that they warn themselves when they need to be evacuated and when they are being evacuated.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware those who are choleric, and whose blood is too agitated and inflamed; if it is necessary that they take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuce in the shade, and similar things; and eat little pucins, and flesh of castle-dweller birds, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, if they take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and reduce little by little, and reduce the small birds and pigeons; and on the day when they are ventosed, they should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men triacle or muscatel before ventosation, or after, to comfort the principal members; and let the blood be subtle, but it does not happen that those who are hot do not drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cupping glasses that are applied without causing harm are those that are applied to the liver, and to the spleen, and to the podagra, and to the stomach and bowel and kidneys and thighs, because these members do not suffer from being cupped in this way, and it is not done except to attract blood from one member to another, as we place them on the arms when they are healthy; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place cupping glasses on the stomach and bowel to diminish the member; and to remove pain, when there is opilation or stone, it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the opilation, or dislodges the stone from its place; and thus it happens when they are placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained cupping, and these cupping glasses are administered empty for sucking so strongly; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot water is given, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with warm or hot water, or water in which herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the ventose administered to fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And have two fingers of a large and half palm's width, and have the edge of a small perforation, just as if to prick with a needle, and be of iron, smooth in front so that it does not bother the patient when putting on the limb; and have in the middle a rod of crossing iron or of steel, to put a bandage in place, and they are big and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them; for the ventouses of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean than the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must thus put this bandage on the limb: take the bandage of wax or linen, and place it in the ventouse across the rod that is in the ventouse, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the ventouse so it does not burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and these two are on the perforation as we have said, so that when one wants to, the vapor goes away, and one removes the bandage; and take the linen as before, and recommence often, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the application of cupping which is administered in disease of the lungs, to the entire aching, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered except when it is full of aching, and it is placed on the limb as much as possible; and that's its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Cupping is not administered except in members where one cannot put cups due to their smallness, such as eyelids and gums, and similar places; and in the desnuding of flesh, such as fingers or toes, and similar things; and the quality of the use is that when you find cuppings that are in sweet gentle aching sensations without purging, take them; and put a nut in a sweet aching, so they become familiar, and have nothing in the veins; and then be healthy with vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place on the cuppings; and when they will be full, and clear, that's where one can put cups, so put it, for it is worth much afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	Here is the translation:
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the sinews do not want to take, rub the place of fresh blood with a needle as long as the sinew is in it, and then put them back, and soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere; and when you see that they hold, sprinkle on a little powder of alum and of crushed psyllium, or of ash, so they will now hold.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here is the beginning of the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that the foolish ones despise this chapter, because they did not find any of the ancient books, nor letter that they could read; and for this reason is estranged the science in our land, because I did not find any good one; and I know nothing, except by the science of the ancient books, which I have so studied that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life; and I have described to you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abridged it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary then that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wise men place their understanding, and dwell on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing prevents him from being entirely whole; just as weakness of body, or old age, or feebleness; or if his tendons are not very strong, or too fragile; and avoid cold joints, which means avoiding frozen joints, and flesh of goat and deer, and do not drink any wine, and do not eat too many greasy foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you have no fear of hot abscess, nor spreading of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to his first government which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make big nourishment, or they have viscosity, as if fermenting in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pancake of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a suitable nourishment represents more and comforts the break most.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reattached or reunited according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but there is no cure, reset the broken bone in the large tendons which separate and join the limb together, so that it strengthens as it was before; and do not make a total break from his work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish with coarse foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a break that goes to the vein, and another while agitating, as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks at all into a small notch.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings back to its place; and it is known that the breakage of the bone occurs because the bones are twisted, and appears well by examination, and sounds with the pressure of the hand; and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no point of breakage; but it can well have twisting, or fissure, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not seem to you that you move the hand, but place medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold steady now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the breakage which goes to the hollow, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that the abscesses do not come to life; and if the abscesses come, if you leave it for a day, until the abscesses are appeased; then you set it in place, so you can lift it lightly and easily, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations of one who has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken in a piece, whether it is of two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or to your hand if it is a small limb, or to two cords, or to a cord and to your hand; and set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are disordered, you reset by all ingenious additions in their places as you can, and beware that through your work no harm or pain comes to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if you straighten it beautifully, and do not strain it too much, nor press as they do who come with their work of abscessed heat and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is in a point, chastise well the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is not in a point, and it must be put in such a disposition that it feels no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is a inflammation or abscess, put on it a soothing hot compress that reduces the inflammation, and removes it, and lets it be for some days; then hold steady your surgical instruments, and make them in the shape of a large reed cane, or of wood from which one makes clamps, or of palm branches, and adapt according to this figure.
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the instrument one puts on the fracture be a little bigger and wider than the others; and be as long as it needs to be for the smallness or greatness of the limb; then hold steady your surgical instruments, just as you did at the first joint, then tie above with a thread, just as at the first joint on the fracture; the tighter it is, the less there is; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too big nor too small, and be of linen yarn; for if the threads are big, like I have seen foolish people make their ligatures with twisted cords, it's a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it's too subtle, and doesn't need to have less than two fingers' width between each instrument.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the heads of the stars after tightening in their healthy places, put underneath them cotton pads or linen cloth, so that it does not become black.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the cartilage is broken, I will tell you the treatment for it afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not matter to tighten the stars all at once on the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	Because the limb is large, it does not suit to put these fierce fires except after 5 or 7 days, or more according to the severity of the aposteme that suddenly supervenes; and see here the manner of the ancientemplasters to restore breakage, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that holds as by walls of a mill, and mix it with abundant water, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and in use, and it's the common manner of the emplaster restoring breakage to many dispositions, and even among women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plasterer restoring the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take Z abrasives and ladani and enule and asa fetida and gum arabic and mugwort, in the amount of 10; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of 5; alechil 8; and make into powder, and mix with egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plasterer, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of emplaster that is good for torsion: take mugwort and vismalve, in the ratio 10; myrrh and aloe, in the ratio 8; acacia 6; Armenian bole 10, and crush well, and mix with water or abundant water, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Here is the translation:
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not heal, but it is good to calm down an inflamed abscess, and properly soothe the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthy papyrus leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way of plastering for the restoration of the bone fracture and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of veal, one part each; and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is scalded, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of plastering stronger than the first, when hard abscess comes to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalve and flaxseed, balaustron, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, one part each; and crush, and mix with saltwater, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Here is the translation:
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply to the broken limb, to restore it, dry and slightly warm things, as we have said, with myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of applying that is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and hazel twigs, or pens of birds, and visnaga, and equalize them, and the brooms, and make an application on the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then release a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not release it by hand soon enough and the pain comes to the spot, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hurry up and release it, and remove the dressing now; and take a lighter bandage, and a sponge with seawater, and dip in water, and lift the limb up so high that the swelling ceases, and the pain is alleviated; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on a dry or oiled cloth, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of a hot abscess; and remove the inflammation from the member, and alleviate the pain, then recommence the subtle treatment, and a little dressing, and do not strain it too much as before; and treat subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the hot abscess and redness and pain and swelling are all gone, and you have mastery of poultice and bandage, then recommence it, as you did previously in equal measure.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the limb in accordance with what we have said, do not dislodge it for at least three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is healed, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh to the bone; then restrain it more than before, and it will fatten its meat, as I have said previously; and if you see that the limb dries out more than is necessary, know that there can be no nourishment; arose from the warm water treatment, every time you dislodge it, and let it be each day, and slightly loosen the bandage; by this work then the nourishment comes to the limb, and hastens what the foolish doctor does, which restores the deformed limb: it is bad, and if it is a painful operation, I do not see anything else but to suffer and to operate correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many types of fractures, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished; for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the whole bone is broken just below the knee which is beneath the bone, as if it were shattered or crushed; and therefore this type of fracture is called "shattering".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the sword cuts through the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is embedded percussion, or splitting, or breaking of the neck of the stone, or falling on stones, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating wound, which approaches just to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound that is repeated in the bone as subtly as a hair, and the crack is small, and therefore this fracture is called "capillary"; and if the wound that is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or similar things, and makes the piece of the bone enter downwards, and it is like the joints are crushed as when they make the warm bath, if it enters within the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And it happens more to those who have moist bones, like the head of a child; and it has all these types of fracture where small pieces are dislodged as if they were scattered; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaks by the traction on them, and the inquiry into their tenderness, and by the rotten flesh that is on.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the hair-like fracture is known by this: when one discovers the bone and rubs against it, then the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, beware of these accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and feverish ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in worse dispositions, so it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an apparent accident, and you expect salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nave (navel) comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hurry to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane beneath the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the break of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary that you divide the affected part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the patient's wounded head, and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and above the figure of the wound more subtle than you can, and if a flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess falls, it helps with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with millet cloth soaked in rose oil; and have the wound rest until the abscess be calmed, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut into the bone from the outside, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut straight ahead, and it is the form.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I make another cut, a larger one than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have a number of diverse cuts, some tight and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it requires that you pierce around, so you can minister gently with tapers, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the entire test, and must have above a point or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you need to have more, if each comes into its place in the width of the bone, if you have tapers for all tests; and this is the form of the three manners of tapers.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing around the bone is that you place a taper on the bone, and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the taper in another part a little afterwards, and do so throughout, then cut into the spaces of the bone which are between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone to your hand, or with one of the instruments that you have, such as pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone, and cut, it is necessary that you sharpen the instrument that remains from the bone to all other similar instruments, but it needs to be more subtle and finer than the other incisors; and if there remain none of the small bones, or no scales, then lift them lightly with one of the instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of surgery is that which Galien says, which is more wise; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, then you will put beneath the head of this lance-like incision, from which it is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and the affected area is on II edges, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then make a small incision above, so that you lightly touch the entire bone around, and take great care of the membrane that is beneath; if it is attached to the bone, lift it lightly, for one lifts well without harm, and feels no fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break of the bone does not pierce up to the membrane, and the bone is covered only superficially above, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to extract the scales from the subtle raspier that you must have in different quantities, to make each place more convenient, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you grind before with large raspier, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-like breaks and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you adjust the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not easily responded to by one who has placed their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soften it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another doubled dressing in II or III, and soften it in wine and rose oil, and put it on top of the first dressing; and do this as lightly as possible, so you do not irritate the wound, then administer above another thread, and do not strain it more than necessary to hold the wound together; and leave it like that for a day or two, until the abscesses are appeased, then remove them, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of wheat, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and put it on the wound, and administer gentle medicines without irritating; and be careful that the wound is completely clean, so you do not leave any ointment, nor leave any swelling, for when swelling assembles beneath the membrane of the brain, it corrodes and becomes porous, and causes great harm to the patient; for when you put something caustic on the wound, it becomes necrotic above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, lest some bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, and it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have fires that come from the medicine that one has put on, which has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue in the drapnel, and put it on the wound; then you cure in many ways that are necessary, until it be healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that no time are broken the three parts of the nail above, or one by the sole, because they are three bones; and the one beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a swelling or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you put your small finger or pertus in the nest, and set the break equally with your finger index, and in the pouch by default, until the nest regains its natural figure; and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot be straightened to its place, it is necessary that you set it evenly at the head of a slightly large radius.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, do it in another way, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscesses have been calmed, then put to the head of the nest, stretching with drapnels of linen, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you apply heat elsewhere, the fracture is; and let the tendons be as large as they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they instruct any healer that one must soften the tents in mud, and move each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that it is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with the preparation of egg white and powdered millet; then leave the tent, until the bone is strong, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes apply heat where the eyes of the eggs are in place of tendons, and if there is a soft drapery around, and it holds the fracture, and soothes the patient within; or do what you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you put cerote or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a pouch of dyachelon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if apostemes (boils) come, then put an emplaster made from flour of sisament and powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then apply light poultices, and do not bind too tightly; and if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract the fragments conveniently to that place, then sew up the wound, and cure things in a soothing way, and anoint, as one applies emplasters and ointments conveniently to that place; and if there is no inner wound in the nose, then cure the tents, and apply canes of lead, until it be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is broken from below, and there is no wound on the surface, and the break is underneath, so much so that it is not broken in two, except where it is held together by a small piece of bone, if one examines it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently feel the break, and hold it in place with the other hand from underneath, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is separated in two, it is necessary that you administer extension from both sides, so much so that it becomes even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth are moved out of place, or broken, you should strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double bandage; and put on the bandage a well-made, firm staple, or a piece of even, long and wide leather according to the jawbone, and tie it to the mouth that you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see the figure changing, dislocate it on the third day, and then put it back in place as it was changed; and apply a poultice made from flour of the mill with abundant water or flour of six months, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are suitable, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it is healthy in twenty-two days.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses appear, treat them according to what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, remove the useless part of the bone that is broken; if you subtly remove the extraneous parts with suitable instruments to that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with a flame according to the need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put suitable dressings on it, to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the violence
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The violence breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the broken violence; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have to master the extension, then place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or leather, and let it be thick according to your need; and hold steady and lift the force, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you put equal the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the defect, because it comes in a wrong way, then it is necessary that the patient leans back on his shoulder, and place under the shoulder a little pillow, and push the ministers' shoulder down, so that the bone of the fracture is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you find broken debris, it is necessary that you sew up; and pull the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, take one of the incisors you have; but place under the forcele this instrument, to ward off the infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it seems a spoon, and is not a chess, and be as large as the hole requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the operation; and have two heads, as you see, and one is large, and the other is narrow, like the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the routing is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, fill the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if you soften them with rose oil and in vinegar and wine, and apply it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The straightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster made of powdered millstone and egg whites, and apply light streaks on top, and place a splint underneath, so you have mastery; then take a very large bandage a palm in width, then apply a double layer on the streaks and the plaster; then take a subtle steel instrument three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so the head of the bandage hangs down; and place the steel instrument on the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and underneath the healthy bone, and underneath the diseased bone; and reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the break firmly, and you clearly see that the steel instrument does not move on the broken bone, so reward it every day, and when the ligatures are relaxed, so restrain it; and make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow underneath, to lift the joint upwards; if you ease the bruising of the forceful part by easing the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and no bad accident occurs, until twenty days; then resume the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and restrain and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored in twenty-eight days, and in less than any homes.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Here is the translation:
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone projects forward, and not beneath the heart, thus they make an incision, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the force to appease a hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the defect.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken within, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and all, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and that sensation is not good.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplasters and bandages above the subtle layer of salt, or another lighter dressing, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and tighten it strongly, and rewrap each hour the bandage, and if it becomes dislocated, then tighten it; and if it is about to slip, due to corrosion or putrefaction that comes from the blood, or pain or abscess, hasten to loosen it, and remove the emplaster, and address what has come in the ways of cures; then reapply the emplaster, and tighten it until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the fracture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	It happens that the fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large ones after the back, and at the end within, and they do not feel it except through this because they are slippery; and one feels it well by questioning as one should.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the resettings are such that you make equal the break, as it is necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick, if you are skilled in this task.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain and numbness, just as if they were pierced, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits a great abundance of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the belly, to soften the fracture at the beginning.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come, if they have not arrived yet.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that one should not put ventouses on the limb, to suck out the matter, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the ventouse does not attract the superfluities from the limb due to the weakness of its disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they direct that one must cover the limb of a wounded leg with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the treatment equal all around, then it will be cured by the treatment of pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the bone that touches the skin, and doubt is in the patient's mind, then it is necessary to cut into the length of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath an instrument to separate the flesh; and then one must make a incision, and treat lightly, and then sew up the lips of the wound, if it is large, and apply cures with plasters, until they are healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come, then put molten drapery in rose oil and apply it to the limb; and treat thus the limb of those that need an abscess, and be careful to place it on the side where it should, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will swell; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then take care to see if their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one holds them firmly and gently, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so one can put a cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then take care to see if the feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation; and when one has felt it on their belly, then there is involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is swooning on his back and wants to sit up, it cannot happen.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: do not labor in vain in his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most light.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you treat it if there is a hot abscess, if put on the spine oil of rose or oil of Mayew, so that it is appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying emplasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone disarticulates, it is necessary to cover on the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the .ij. levers of the wound, so that it is large, into a bandage, then apply the ointment of ignition, heating the flesh, until it is healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you put your pouch on your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand at your power, then put the emplaster and the staple on, so that you have mastery; then hold tight, and if there is a disarticulated bone, make an incision, and remove it, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Although the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it does, then there is not a small amount of diminution at the head; and it makes a hollow long, and declines to the partition, and comes to the patient's pain in the limb, and point, and inflames what breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand up, so that you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and its shape are; and if the fracture is at the head only, then match equal to that fracture, so that it is in a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is hollow long, or it declines to the inside, then make the patient sit on their belly, so that the restoration of that fracture may be apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, place on the poultice, then place on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move; and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the ligament is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if apostemes (abscesses) come, do not touch them, until the abscesses are appeased, and place on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold steady as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are those which are between the elbow and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a full flat iron, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lay the joints in a straight line, and they are elevated high, and sit the patient on a seat; then put his broken arm on the iron, until it comes to the joint, and have in the middle of a curved iron, then place on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors to the breakage equally with their hands together, until the breakage returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you bind the patient to his stool, and tie his hand to his neck, then instruct the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the ligaments, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forced, hold the lien beneath the breakage, and upon the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the breakage is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you place the lien mean beneath the joint, and another towards the side, beneath the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side, it is necessary to put the lien lightly, without labor, until the breakage is equal on the limb, and on the side; then set the breakage equal, as it is necessary, and hold steady, lest abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if apostemes wounds come, do not hold back until the seventh day, and apply a soft ointment in a gentle manner with rose oil, so that the apostemes wounds are appeased; then hold steady, and the way of holding is to put the dressing on the breakage, then assemble the arm at the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the cloth, and hold steady on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, so nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use these instruments, and place on the breakage a larger and stronger instrument than the others, and have between each instrument two fingers of space, and let each instrument be as large as it passes the breakage in two parts; then hold steady on the instruments, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, more strongly and less in dislocating.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the alignment of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be tied up to the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each of three days, that the swelling does not inflame and come to the limb, where the nourishments cannot come because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you approach, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, do not loosen it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and put their hands on their stomach; and place under the shoulder a soft cushion, evenly lined, and look each hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or is not softened by the bands; if you approach through the power of medicine, and give them the food that we have previously described, in such a way that the food is at first subtle; and when they begin to recover, it should be abundant.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg joints should be reset within 40 days of everything; and then one must loosen and administer baths and medications for the joints to recover.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the joint is rough and swollen, it takes 10 days or 2 months to loosen.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one of which is small, and it is the one that connects to the shoulder; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large foscile breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small fractures are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings; and when large ones are broken, the healings are bad, and more grievous than when they are broken in a gathering.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's the small fracture that is only slightly broken, then it needs to be extended lightly, and set evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large fracture, then it needs to be stretched more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and tie the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministrations as an arm to the part below his hand, or to the linen, and another ministration above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts his mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no disunion that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then put it back together and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breakage of a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses or swellings appear, thus glue I apply a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and I apply the dressing subtly above, until the abscesses or swellings are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then I remove the wax, and I put on a plaster made of powder from the mill with plenty of egg white, then I place the staples, and let the staple of the fracture be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have six staples or arms in several positions: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two; and hold more above the fracture than another part, and tighten less when approaching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which it is strained from linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reset the limb and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident happens to the limb, as if gangrene is coming to the limb, it is necessary that you treat the limb with warm water, so that the gangrene is appeased; and let the limb not be tightly bandaged, but rather rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then recommence the strapping, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, set them right.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that the numbness does not come to the limb, because it is too stiff, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it be thus for some days, until the numbness is corrected, and then hold steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not untie him until 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	where he is turned, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his necks are even, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers that have had few fractures, and it does not come but to bend many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient be crossed, and stands upright before him equally; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and puts them in their proper places, so they are well joined; and puts the plaster and the poultices, so that abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the injury; and it is wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the palm of the hand near the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken plant; and then bind with a long bandage, and let the splint be of soft leather as big as the plant of the hand, and bind, if it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the plant, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and dry the linen between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of the fingers, it is a pouch, put it in its place, as it is necessary; and bind with the plant, and see if you can put a small straight splint to lift the break, and do not move; and if the break is in other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, put it in its place, and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or you tie all together in a holder, which is worth nothing, or you put on a splint, as a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and beware what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen well when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration is that one ties above the breakage, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient puts his face, then each minister extends his bandage to his equal part; and it's when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the hip, one of the ligaments is towards the thumb, and the other ligaments are below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, and then the ligaments are towards the knee, and then the extension is downwards; then put the mirrors to the bone equal with its two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if abscesses come from there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down then return to your work and your treatment; the treatment is done in such manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you envelop the break with a doubled bandage in two or three layers, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the ankle bones come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee downwards, and make the head of the thread above; then turn the bandage on the leg and the hip, then put these on the break, and put a stake on the bone of the leg; then fill the empty space between the leg and the hip with soft drapery to tighten the binding, then begin to bind firmly three or four times around the break; and as you go up above the break, there is less constraint; then take the two heads of the thread that you put between the leg and the hip, and remove the three stakes that are above, then return below to the head of the thread, so that you come from beneath the foot; and the binding, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that there comes neither abscess nor inflammation nor any similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then disjoin it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that stick out, then it is necessary to cut them away, so it can be; and if it cannot be, then it is necessary to break the bone, and make a new treatment; and the cure, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And often the thigh is broken in this way when you put staples, as in the joint and arm; however, in the restoration done in this manner, it does not bother the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the pulse is restored at the same hour, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee joint there is often little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and it has an open wound, and feels pain, and that feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one puts together what is broken at its joints, so that it is assembled as it can be; then put on the plaster, and you put a round stave, if you have mastery of it, and hold it steady as it ought to be, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breaks, such as hot abscesses and similar things; so put on each accident what it needs, so that it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" by right, and the other is called "foscile"; and it has a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm equally, and the work is all there. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is fractured, it twists forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it feels great pain, and one sees it well; and it turns downwards.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then one should make an extension, and put it equally, and place the splints equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is lesser and lighter; and adjust according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take nine threads of flax that overlap the leg on one side and the other, and are two fingers long from the knee up to the shin; then wrap them in nine layers above and below, and tie them in the middle, and at this time do not let the leg decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one will forget the nine threads long on the leg, and it is of flax, and you put them on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a cast on the fracture where there is a wound; and every day move the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; as long as one cures until they are healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bone in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes break and sometimes two pieces, and there are not more than four or five dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the ankle bone breaks, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and now put your foot on the joint where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their place; then apply a plaster cast and stoups above, and under the belly of the foot a small table at .ij. plain levels, then hold the foot firmly, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, release the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken, whether dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken bones, set them right, as we have said about the fingers; then put on the broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot of the table that I mentioned, and hold it firmly; and if there are three or four, or more, broken bones, set each one with a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the foot under the table; and let it be standing on top of the table, away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken; and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone in the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, if she makes it swell, then incline it to the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the belly with cotton of the patient's nature, and put a large amount as I sto; then remove the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jumps the cotton, until it reaches the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the sto; and when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or so: if the break will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of birthwort, and tie a thread to the perineum, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow into the thread forcibly, until the bladder is inflated within: the nature will return the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the thumb of the man is broken, or of the woman, if he resets it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who applies his study and use, and intends my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break signifies more dispositions in the right way of restoration: then gives the gift.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the twig, when it is broken, take a girdle of egg and bind the twig; then wrap drapels around, and leave it two or three days, and it will be healthy soon.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for him who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, as in the case of the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be healthy now, so that the healings that we have said testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if you have no other remedy, then start again to restore the bruise at the same hour, or on that day, lest abscesses form and do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses form and come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, so long as the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered chest, then it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not apparent to put in place with your hands, then you must reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has .vij. two or .viij. eight inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary to grasp .iii. three or iiij. four, according to whether there is more need for it in each treatment of fracture; and let it be rough and a little thick, so it does not slip away from compression on the limb during your work, and let it be thus beforehand, and thicker by half an inch ahead, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche", because it requires that the curved head be placed on top of the apparent bone; and the joint is bent at once, until they are reunited, and become equal one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, it requires that you grasp the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then grasp with an instrument suitable for that, whether incisor or saw, to your power; then reassemble what is remaining in the bone of asperties and minor scars.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Here is the translation:
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that a bad accident may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, then it does not suit to put on these; but envelop entirely around, on the limb of these, thick drapes, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see afterwards on the next day or third day to irrigate a wound, then remove what you have put on at all cost, and apply gentle healing remedies, as one applies Tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you anoint the limb three times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it be sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be bandaged in such a way that the swelling goes down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but rather becomes swollen again, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, for many times death results, but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	the abscesses which come upon the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the health of the bruise, especially when it is near the joint, and the ugly thing is to see the shape of the limb; and by chance one cannot make the limb do its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed when the nose is fresh: if you administer medicines in a stinging manner, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine or abundant water or with oil; and put them on the spot in poultices, and hold it well, and do not remove it for many days; and then remove it, and start another, until the nodules are eliminated; or you hold onto a piece of well-made plaster; for the property of the plaster is that it eliminates all inflammation from the limbs; and if the nodule is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, so scrape above, and make the superfluous apparent; or take it to some surgeon, until it is eliminated, and cure it until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after the treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break of the bone is restored, and afterwards the members are weak and subtle, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not come the nourishments to the member; or because of multitude of aggravations; or because of too great movements, not in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, thus it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the wound often closes quickly, until the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	because of a twisted member after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after the restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the member is ugly, it does not perform its natural function: so do not believe those fools who say that one should break the member anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and these operations are blamed, and great evils come from them, and perhaps death; however, if the nodations and torture are fresh, then it is necessary to apply warm water, or mollifying herbs are applied, as for example leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilote, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, as if you have done well, and take the mucus of vismalve, and mix it with grease of geline or oil of sisament, and apply the plaster; or take greasy figs, and crush them with flour of colon, and similar medicines that alleviate the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the node is removed by continually rubbing and moisturizing for a long time with damp hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And so restore movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted part is enveloped and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, if it is necessary to cover just up to the bone, in subtle cutting gently; and to put caution and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it must now be brought back into alignment.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if you delay, the limbs swell, and perhaps if you reset them to their place; therefore it is not good to move them at the hour when they are swollen: often it causes spasms and other pains; however, when this happens, make the patient healthy first, then let him be, until the apostemes (abscesses) are pacified; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it gently, and cure each member as the cure will come to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to a better disposition through several remedies.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, it is necessary that you reset it quickly, and do not delay; and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and put their fingers as a pochet in one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two fingers should be spread out, to set it even; and instruct the patient that they relax their jaws, and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the fingers set evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the resetting is difficult, especially if it concerns the two jaws together, use hot water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are evenly reset, and the patient's mouth closes well, feeling mollified, if you put on a warm cloth made of rosset oil and wax, then lightly tie it with many threads; and have the patient sleep on his back, and his head should be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor exert himself too much, but take light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are numb; and then eat what he wants lightly, and do not exert himself too much in opening his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well numbed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put in place at one hour, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and accustomed pain come, and perhaps a solution of belly wind, and perhaps a vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a bad sign; and many times he who has had it dies, in eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge from the thick part of the bone, and in the continuation of it and of the foot, and it is dislodged sometimes at the defect, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the poultice and bandage, and hold it in place; the joint that is next to the hip cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it does dislocate sometimes, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the poultice and bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healthy; and thus the joint of the spine is restored, when it is out of its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Here is the translation:
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fall, and the shoulder is affected by a hot abscess, and it seems dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine them, as long as you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocations when it falls towards the shoulder blade, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the shoulder blade touches the head of the shoulder, as if it were an ulcer; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their knee, nor move with any movement; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch; and this type of dislocation does not need to be reset, when it is new, or if the infant is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient upwards, then place their fingers underneath the axilla, and lift the joint upwards strongly to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it upwards, then put it in place; if it will be hastened.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water; and the administrator should apply mollifying and soothing remedies, such as a decoction of altea and fenugrec and mellilot in water, and let it be administered; then let the patient be laid on their back, and place under the shoulder blade a strap of linen cloth, not too soft nor too hard, then put the doctor's hand on the strap, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and draw out the hand of the patient; and another administrator holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will return now, and if you see that you reset it according to this method: and it is necessary for you to have present a helper who is stronger than the patient; and let them be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder under the shoulder blade of the patient, and lift the shoulder blade upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air; and another administrator draws out the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too lightweight, then place something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long stick in the ground, so that the head is also straight like a pestle, and not too large or too slender; then place it under the patient, but let it have soft drapery above, and the patient should be standing for a long time; then extend their hand below the other part in the same way, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return through all these things that we have said, do this cure: take a stick of two arms length and four fingers wide, which has the head entering obliquely into the hollow of the armpit, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place the stake beneath the head of the post, so that the post does not touch the patient, then put it beneath the seat of the patient; and extend one arm on the post from the length, and attach the shoulder to the post, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair, and extend the hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now return in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that you place under the axilla a sphere of equal linen, then apply the poultice made from powdered millstone, with incense and egg white, over the entire shoulder and around, then hold it under the axilla firmly, and turn the bandage on the poultice, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you massage little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, then it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of its place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, then it is necessary that you apply cauteries at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the shoulders, or behind, if it is caused by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another treatment; and cures until he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing, stiffness comes to the limb, and late in movement, so the patient bathes many times, until that stiffness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint of the neck is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, because one sees it well and feels it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the affected joint with the healthy one, if it can be seen openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that abscesses do not develop, for if abscesses develop, it would be grievous to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to his two hands; and his arms should be expanded, and the hands of the mirror according to the injured limb, above and below, and adjust the joint to its small pieces together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and strengthens from the root of the palm the injured limb which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold it with two ministers, so it does not move at extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double long and wide cloth; and when the mirrors join the joint to their hand, anoint with no oil to soften the joint, then put the joint in its proper form, until it recovers; and when it is in its place, set on a dry plaster with a lot of egg white, and hold firmly, and bind the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then disband.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, release the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, start again with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels gripped after the relocation of the joint, and it moves, so bathe and rub well, and press until it is relieved; or you put on the joint a fat woolen strip, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a warm bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint temporarily, then put the strip back on, and then enter into a warm bath; and do this two or three times until it is healthy; and if you see, so put on a moist warm compress with butter, and hold steady.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is easy, more than the other joints Anyway, it must be reset to its place hastily, at the same time that it is dislocated, so that the limbs are not swollen, or that an abscess does not form there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the relocations are such that you put the bad hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and align them equally, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it returns to its natural position; it is necessary that you examine if it is well in place; then put the patient's hand back on a table at extension and relocation.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the surgeon places their hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that's good; if not, then strain the swollen abscesses gently, and let them begin to heal again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains; and do not harm the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot be strained at all: then know that the nerves are damaged, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy except to strain by fire cautery in this case, and perhaps nothing else will work.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then extract and leave it for five days, then remove it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, then apply warm water, and rub it until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in each part, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the belly; then the fingers are bent, and put the dislocation into its pouches until it returns, then hold the top of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjoined; and leave it for two days, and then make it equal on that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and unbind it each day, and make it move, and rebind it at night; and do this often, until it is straight, and do the same if it is dislocated in the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	because of the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly happen with a strong will, and cannot be held back, and many times some members are softened, or the two hips or the two arms or one; and many times the spine is moved to four parts; the one that moves at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you should recognize that gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no cure or healing of the entire body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one that comes from falls or blows or similar things, say the ancient ways of cures with grand words, where there is no great profit in all; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gilbositeit that comes to the front of the chest, no one is healthy; and also the one that comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure unless it is the proper one that comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in a straight line, and have the extraction from beneath them, so they do not slip; then fix the stick in the ground firmly, and another at the foot, and tie a bandage beneath the limbs of the patient, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know how to tie the bands, one at the head and others at the feet, among the two sticks; and let them be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the doctor puts their palms on the spine firmly, until they recover.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a tub of three feet in length, and place it beneath the patient, and the patient should be on their side, and put the head of the tub beneath the patient, then place the middle of the tub on the spine; and put the mirrors at its ends on the other head of the tub, and press well, until they return to their place; and if you see, do it in a circle that turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you fix two clamps at the head of the patient's arm, and two others at their feet, and between each clamp, above and below, a palm's length apart; and have in each clamp a perforation, where the circle turns, and the clamps are firmly on the ground, so they do not move; and between the two clamps there is one turning clamp, on which the circle turns, and have two small clamps of a palm's length apart to turn the circle; and then tie the thread that is among the handles to the circle at the head, and the other thread to the feet at the other circle, and each of the ministers turns their circle with all the threads, and the masters set the spine straight as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, set a soothing plaster with an abundance of egg whites, and then the bandages, and then the straight edge of a tablet of three long inches, which surrounds the part of the spinal column and the healthy area of the vertebrae, then tie it with a string, as we have said, and use subtle remedies for nourishment, until they are healthy; and if anything comes at the end of health, you must administer soothing and calming medicines, with the straight edge that we mentioned before; and never give medicine on a piece of cloth, and never does the appearance come in the back of the spinal column behind the back, and think that it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which one should not have false hope: perhaps death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out of dislocations simply, not as with other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated according to three parties: within and without, and forward and backward; and more within are the haunches, and a little dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when you join the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the ailing knee than the healthy one, and the ailing one cannot double its knee at the fire; and it is the joints that are weakened by hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one to whom it comes to fail, it is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who has gone before, it is that they straighten their leg according to the fulfillment; however, they do not bend their knee without pain, and if they want to urinate, they cannot go forward, and retain their urine, and swell the ankle, and when they walk, they pass over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who has it in the back are that they cannot stretch their knee, nor bend, and the leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is out of place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this type of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are old, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no effective cure; and it does not seem that they have a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the three manners of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and stretch within and without, and move to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the minister strongly, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or tie it to the thigh; and another minister stretches his hand over it in such a way that he puts his hands under the patient's knees, then tightens with a soft thread around the hip; and another pulls the top of the ligature; and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this does not happen, then you must put a cure in its likeness. When the dislocation is in the hip joint, then you must set the patient on their healthy side, then put the ligature at the root of the hip, and the place that is under the groin, then stretch the ligature above towards the groin, and towards the strength; then take another minister's arms, and encircle the large part of the hip with the affected limb, and hold it firmly in its proper form: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft ligature above the two heels, and above the two knees; and let the diseased leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other; then let it be suspended from the top of a pole, and let it be on the ground the arm's length; then command the minister to bind the top of the thigh, and let another minister hang alongside the patient, who binds the thigh strongly, for the joint now returns hastily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is at the fault, thus guide the patient, as we have said in the one who has gout, and stretch the ligature above the diseased leg properly, and above the feet also; then put two tongs, one at the top and another at the feet, then fix a tong between the thighs of the patient in the form; and place moist drapery around, so it does not touch the patient, then each minister extends towards him, and the doctor puts his hand equally to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibbosity, and adjust the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, you must stretch out the affected leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and put the mirror on the painful area above the affected limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, then do not extend the patient's leg downwards, nor lift it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said about the positioning on the two hips; and let it be on its face, and the bandage is extended as we have said before, and must press on the joint to the table; and it will be at a point when the patient extends their legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, and put the dressing, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and rest for three days or four, then remove it, and put the dressing on; and if you see that they are even, then bind as before, and let it be for three days; then remove it, and make it slide smoothly, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward, forward, and backward; and it does not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their knee to their thigh, and if they do not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg as much as possible, and put your back against their face, and put your foot against their feet; then take their knee in your hands, and pull between your two, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and another minister stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it adheres well to their thigh lightly; and apply the plaster on top, and adjust the leg to the thigh, and bandage them together strongly for three or four days, then release; and do not trouble the patient too much, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all, if administration of strong extension is needed, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated: the resetting is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated, one must make the patient sit upright, and hold the administration strongly by the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it high, and firmly set the foot high; and do this twice, as we have said, in setting and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, start the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and firmly fix the foot on the ground between his thighs, and tie the bandages around, so the patient does not move; then hold the administration with one hand, and another administration extends the foot with their hands or with a strap, so it is against the collar of the foot; then extend each administration equally, and the foot is held firmly between the thighs of the patient to retain the patient when they are extended; then put the mirrors equally to set the dislocation with their hands, and another administration holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it has reached the point, set the plaster and poultices on top, and bind firmly, and apply a bandage to the leg, and wrap the veins that are on the back of the knee, so the ligatures are not too tight; then let it be for two or three days, and if the ligatures soften, bind again; then remove it on the third or fourth day, and delay going to see the patient for four days; and if it goes beyond this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses arise from it, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them gently without force, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any of the two toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or table, straight and upright, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press your foot firmly until it returns to its place; and when it is even, and there is no gap, set under the sole of the foot a small table at two inches, then bind firmly, and let it be for three days, then remove it; and make them rest, until they are healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and have long experience, and be pitiful and merciful and tardy, not hard; and use gentle remedies at the beginning of soothing abscesses hotly, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscesses may not come back to life; and when the limb is in its place, then administer gentle remedies soothing abscesses hotly, and cure the wound, as it is fitting, with desiccated ointments; and if with dislocation there is a fracture, and you do not find the bone, set them, and do what we have said in simple illnesses; and beware of entering into fear's path, according to what I have said, for it is worth nothing according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and body.
Amen	Where fire cautery is commanded for the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
