O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish this with the treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fires except for small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed off and the science is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I want to vivify the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will assemble the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and of the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it behooves him who undertakes to immerse himself in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and of moving veins and of resting ones, and where they issue from.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the names with the name are not much, and with the work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and likewise in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, if he does not take care, he will fall into error and harm people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Thus I have seen many of those who engage in this science, and then abandon it, lacking knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I see a foolish doctor who treats an abscess on the neck or throat of a woman, and treats the arteries of the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood flowed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of a man's kidney, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he took out with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called by the patient to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if one touched it, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another doctor who took in care Duke Henry of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wounded place;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the doctors, out of ignorance, held the breakage steady over the wound with very strong force, and did not leave the wound any calmness, and left it thus in torment;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded that it not be touched at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and then it happens that the leg becomes completely swollen and the feet and comes to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and release the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I had it reset it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was almost entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wound that burst open an abscess, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of its dominance.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is full of melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	it is to know, namely where there is danger in many dispositions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish mirrors cannot speak evil of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in a crossing, and you undertake your wounded limbs lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and are praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and let the grievous diseases be alleviated of painful sanity;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and remove your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may be able to come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says among some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take a bad disease in hand, lest you be called foolish physician.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medicinal cautery, and these chapters are organized from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and about the forms of instruments, and the iron tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and cupping glasses and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it is the chapters arranged in order and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is arranged according to the low head just as feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid, and of harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and hidden responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about this spoke the wisest of the wise men, and agreed with this;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I suffered little for their words, because I reduced the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery helps universally to every complexion where there is matter, before the complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	it is to know cold temperament without material, and dry temperament without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a cold and dry complexione together with material, they devised none and said that cautery is great aid;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery is not suitable for a disease that comes from cold and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure a cold disease with cold, nor through dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and he said that those who say the opposite, that cautery makes great aid to cold and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	Because you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in no way should one interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the outcomes and the space of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have no less fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assembled and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that assembling fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medical cauterization.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it is not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The burning remedies pass from one member to another by connecting, and bring to the affected limb grievous sanitation diseases;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and sometimes it kills the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire, due to its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I remove the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out bodily diseases, as the philosopher said in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	For you receive in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and they select the suitable moments.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries are often alleviated by the aid of cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and meanwhile the cauteries are for necessary pains and sudden injuries that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think only of this, dear son, as foolish people customarily do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the illness that is healthy through cautery has no relapse;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are cause of the pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the hastiness of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its signory.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it happens that the disease becomes worse at times according to the patient's temperament and the location of the disease and its severity.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are gathered in him the excesses through the acquisition of food and similar things, so that it is not administered cauterization at the location where there is little excess and moisture, just as cauterization of denseness for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	but it happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauterization the last resort of medicine because when we administer ways of cures for any disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient ones said that cauterizers of golden instruments are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and because of the height of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the handles of cauterizers do not make putrefaction, but this is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it is true in some homes;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and golden cauterizers are more valuable than those of iron, as they told us.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And however when you heat a golden instrument, you do not know when it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	they make to the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough of impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use cauterization of iron that we have made more suitable to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter according to the chief joints just below, because it is easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	for fire cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	These cauteries are good for moisture and cold on the brain, and in it there is a remedy made by the cause of a disease called "soda", and by the cause of many humors which descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for multitude of noises and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold if like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine modifying the chief three or four times, according to whether the strength and the age and the habituation of the patient can suffer it;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the patient rest the injured head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your shoulder;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the gum, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because that is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And put it on the marked spot of ink, and do it by descending and extracting your hand little by little while twisting;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand suddenly, and turn the spot so you see the bone I little hole;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, then recommence the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	afterwards take a little silk, and put in warm and soft cotton inside, and put on the spot, and leave it three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after putting a millstone on the buttocks;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let it be until the swelling is reduced;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the old men said that when the wound stays open for a longer time, it purges more;
et por ce si aide mues.	and therefore it helps to move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one should not leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And others say that one should cauterize so much to leave it thus, and strike strongly so that the bone is exposed as widely as the circle that women put on their thighs, because the humors issue forth.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one should leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards one should cure and sew it up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some cases where there is a risk of fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should let them grow;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by the continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and similarly when the head of a patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salubrious and mild for me, and I usually work in assembling a healthy condition.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the entire head is afflicted with chronic pain, and it lasts a long time, then one should use the remedies of iris and pills that are called "cochie", and purging of the head and eyes and applying plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize beneath this one a little bit, as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After making fire cautery on some curved horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and make the cautery where it is called "vasselez".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is the joints in which one puts ventouses;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patients feel too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the moisture of the head, and this is the method:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease has spread to the eye, and the head is purged by mundane medicines, and other treatments that I have said in the division of diseases are made, and all this does not profit at all:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then you make cauteries according to two manners, that is to know of medicine by water and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauteries of medicine by water are that you prick a sweet deal of salt, and remove the crust and recover the poultice as the head, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can restore the deal of salt beneath the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it will be restored, bind it and hold it well and let it thus for 12 hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then unbind it and pull out the deal of garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put on a cotton cloth soaked in butter until it makes a scab.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of the wound, until it is healthy;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that I have written or described twelve treatments of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery to the form that it is in:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a nail or it has little curvature, and in a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that most of the thickness of the cauterizing fire is absorbed;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so that the artery does not become hardened, which is furthest, and runs with abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards put cotton on the wound, and place it on the spot for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then I put moist cotton in a poultice, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healthy;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this emigrated wound with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and beware of cutting the artery in this emigrated wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries mentioned beforehand in medicine do not soothe it, then it is necessary to heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it becomes white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and signify thus on the dull eye a line of half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and hold steady so you do not touch the artery and do not approach up to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and guard against the mandible that moves when one chews, and the nerves have no regard except for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against the disorder of blood in the artery when it will be touched, or touching has great fear and mistrust to him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the vein grow in my way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it flows.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healthy;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of extracting the artery, with the cautery that has two cuticles;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and these are better cauteries than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has tried medicines that dissolve and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncturing all around the ailing ear, or around the two where the pain holds in both, and slightly dislodge it beneath the root of the ear before you have signed the place of the incision;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and let him have points touched behind each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, let the limb be sound.
de la torture de la bouche	from the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Pain that must be healed by fire cautery is not fiercer than those that move with inflammation, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make a cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this type of pain that moves with inflammation and evacuations of the head and gagging, and it does not improve, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the joint of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and have it cauterized at the top of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let the cautery iron stay on as long as it takes for the worst of the heat to subside;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is similar to the cutting instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the cuts be a bit larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the limb as I said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you perform four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the limb called "vassels" as we have said before, and the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large pills and Mondifian powders to calm the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	afterwards take the entire head of the patient and place on the occiput a plaster of Sinapis, which is written or treated in the treatises of plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is thus healthy, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not, make three cauterizations on the skin of the head descending to the neck, and let there be a space between each cauterization of two fingers' width.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it as the others, and if you see it is necessary, and the patient is suffering, make one cauterization in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the mastery is, two others on the two horns, and treat until he is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cauterers who are called "olivares" as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of that which we have said before.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	afterward cleanse the head of the patient, then make a cauterization on the head and on each horn, and behind and thirdly on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then make four cauterizations on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it be until the worst of the heart is burned, and lift your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until he is healthy, and let the cauterers who are called "olivares" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to purify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severely suffering and unable to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot bear the suffering, then make him gargle and chew mundifying food often with good meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the king's head is in a mirror, and you make fire cautery according to what we said before, and you apply the cautery to the little vessel, and to each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is strong and resilient, you make fire cauteries as I said to one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive-tree cautery be according to the manner that I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle fire cauterization according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross moisture, then cauterize with such fire cauterizations as we said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will clear their brain, according to what was said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king's head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after you make a well-made trephine, also like a circle, if you put it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient is crossed, and may be well held from all parts;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after presenting the limb, and it is moved by the burst of old herbs;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and the heat is tempered with fire, so that the fingers can be applied to suffer the pus;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after viewing the circle inward within the head, and let it cool down;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient every week once with another good government, until he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you want to cauterize, make points more often all along the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cauterization moisturizes the brain equally;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on a cotton wool moistened in butter and in grease of goose.
de l’awe des eulz	of the warmth of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing humecting the head, and ward off all moisture, and make sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he commands his head to be cooled, and have him cauterized within the head, and have two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the water is with both eyes together, or in one if the descent is in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and touch all the cauteries to all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stain it with a little powder as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about extracting arteries and incising the cautery, how you will apply it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes one performs cautery or hastening beneath the two hindmost bones.
dou cors des larmes	at the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the deformed head;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that it is from the cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I mentioned at the beginning of the treatise, descending to the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I perform cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or hastening beneath the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it is more affected, then one should cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	at the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you administer medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give three cups of broth to the sick person.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After the king's head, and make a cautery or a thousand gold cauteries;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavulis" on the two ulcers, a little below the eyebrows;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery that you do not puncture it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the papier (pupil) of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	of that which is in the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that make two cauteries on the two ulcers as long as the eyelashes are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	It sometimes happens that the hair of the eyes is converted into a pustule, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	it's to know about fire, or ardent medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in good health;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after marking on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as similar as the dead leaf, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put moist cotton in a gleam of egg and musk of pearl on the eye, then heat the cautery to the form that is there;
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, so that the heat should be there at that place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise to the tip of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then I put moist cotton in a blistering way until the inflammation is removed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of the joint so that it becomes healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after that the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on the same spot, just as you did previously;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are burned, then cauterize until the skin is lifted to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye with hairs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The medical cauterizers are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and lively chalk, of each one a Z., and crush well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then sprinkle on the form that you have made like the leaf of a mirror, and put on the paper of eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease holds in one only solvent, then should one open in one, and if both are alike thus;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put beneath the oil cotton wadding in a egg white;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and let the head of the patient be in your health and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the poultice and the wadding all the times that the patient feels biting of the medicine, for it feels biting as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have made them grow long, then apply medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting is past, lift the skin of the wound, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if he is thus, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If this does not work, then put more medicine on the wound or the medicine has not worked, so that your operations are equal, and your eyes are in focus;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a soft cloth moistened in a warm potion so that the bitter hearts are clear, after curing the wound of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, so that it may be healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary for you to take good care of your work with great attention so that there is no lack in the medicine as eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that wound which is softened by the proper parchment, just as you have done before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure so that it may be healthy.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the leaf of dead myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constrictions accordingly.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let him not stray from the straight path to whom it is the study of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of illnesses, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it nod.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	then apply a moist cotton cloth to the affected eye or to the juice of persillation upon the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	then heat the cautery which is thus prepared:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped to the head like the form of a hollow pen, so that it may be the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, it should be pointed from one part of the head to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but always, this which is shaped thus is suitable for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing on the fistula, it is uncovered, and one draws out the pus, and the dryness.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and it is closed, if it opens, and one draws out the fluid from the bowl;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after placing the hot iron on the cautery site, and holding your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail next to the eye, so that your hand does not make a fool;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If that does not work, then recommence the cautery once again, and another time you have mastery of it, and leave it three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after I place on a cotton pad in a poultice, and cure the disiccation of the ointment as long as it is healthy, and if 40 days pass without it being healthy, then I place on a medicine with corrosive acid so that the bone is uncovered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and the king according to what he would come into his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Then make a fistula, and close the wound.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after putting it in the incision, I examine subtly what its shape is.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make a quantity of an ounce of powder.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firmly, and the patient does not move at all, so that the melted powder does not run to its eye.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a cotton cloth moistened with egg whites or in water.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the powder if it reaches the wound of the fistula, and the healthy part by marvelous sanitation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer powder to the nail, and bring the fistula back to its own proper place according to what is suitable for it.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks on the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks on the lips occur that are called "poils", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks of the bone that we have discussed in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply a small cautery scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it hastily in those cracks until it comes just to the font.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the wound of the scab, until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the joint, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after having made putrid matter and rot and is inflamed and becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you apply the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron instrument comes to the front of it, and where behind it stays;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do thus once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it be healthy;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is cured thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	two movements of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it does not help, then put the patient's head in a healthy position;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heating the cautery whose form will come thus afterwards in such a way that you put a cane against the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after lifting your hand and reapplying the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	then fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and hold it for an hour and rinse forcefully.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or decay, and medical treatments are of no value, then it is necessary to use cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cauterization of blister and cauterization of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization of blister is such that you take blister of a cow, and the end in a spoon of iron or copper;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after taking cotton and wrapping it around the point of a tent, and moistening it in blister water, and placing it on the aching tooth quickly and holding it until it cools;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the moist cotton and blister water are cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and place in the hot iron so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauteries together with fire are such that you take a cane of iron or copper, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After burning with fire cautery, because of this the wound will form crust afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be alleviated that same day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good warm water in the impression of that cautery, and then he should spit it out forcefully.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that is the form of a good cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a good cautery on the part of the body that you want, and according to what you are able to do.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and that is the form of the burn:
des scrophules	of the scalps
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of humid and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn with fire cautery, because afterwards it will form crust, and have two openings for the fumes to exit from the cautery on the other part.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and put the cautery iron on the abscess once, or where it is, until it reaches the root of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, then put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put on a cotton molehill in a poultice so that the discharge is drained away;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, anoint the limb with ointments and tents until it be sound.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the humors collect on the channels of the arm, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be emptied first by soluble medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	after you do cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but only a little;
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the fire cautery, apply another cautery to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal the limb as we have said before, so that it may be healthy.
de la toust	of the tonsils
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all the diseases of the lung are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever nor cough, and it is a chronic disease, then apply two cauteries to the ribs in their corners;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery between the nipples amidst the breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the shape mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, apply cautery by pricking to the entire cautery that is called "points" because the shape is thus before in the disease of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the skin be just to XXX, where they are inserted.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three places according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are lighter cauteries, because you make three of them at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Then let the patient be rubbed on his back and on his sides;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then lift the heart that is within the swollen area with the fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two points where it is in the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just to the side, and there would come the figure of the cautery along with three cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and because of this, cautery is done with the cautery that has three points, for which the figures of cauterization are six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and they are the veins according to the subtlety of a thread and it is the form of the cautery that has three points;
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is it joined to this .i. nerve because it has .viij. cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After applying fire cautery, they burn with a hot iron;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after making the patient rest, and not moving their limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little things happen there, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery claw, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is restored, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach coldness and much moisture gather there until they distort his complexion, and multiply the catarrh to him, and are accustomed manners of cures that do not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be supported on his back, and stretches out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From that point on, I make three fire cauteries in the shape of a knife for the quantity of a finger, with each entire fire cautery, and two fire cauteries on the sides, so that the figure of the fire cauteries is at three angles, and has some space between one and another so they are not joined together when they are applied to the skin.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the fire cautery be so profound that it penetrates the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the fire cauteries be according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a large fire cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will have fear of this fire cautery, will burn in pricking and sign on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you see of an inch.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Then cauterize all of the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we had before, until it be healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver suffers from cold and moisture and great windiness, so much that it is far removed from its natural complexion through the superfluities;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit them at all, if it is necessary that the patient be anointed on their thigh;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and apply three cauteries according to this form and this shape and this quantity on the liver, below the hypochondries, where the humor or the seat of the pain comes;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and let there be a space between each cauterization the width of a finger;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cautery be two fingers' length from the body, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	And let it be scorched so much that the worst of the heart is sweet, and let the patient's right hand be on their feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, let him lean back, and stretch out his legs, and lift his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and that is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if your wound is, if you cauterize these cauteries of the cutellarium, be subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry out the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it not come near the bouillon, for the heart is very subtle there, and you should beware to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too extreme;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if he is on the couch, he feels a wild pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment touches the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be warned about his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then point out the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a reason, from which it takes its shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery as much as the vein is burnt, and approach just to the siphac, until the porreture is entirely purified;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment, according to the treatment of the wounds, until he is healthy;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not suitable that anyone uses this cautery unless he who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and whose hands these diseases have corrected many times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can hardly work, and always it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of fire cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one must make multiple cauteries at the roots of aristologe, and in such manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of aristology as long as you can find it, the largest possible, and let it be dry, and also let it be as thick and as long as your fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and grind it into oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and apply small cauterizations a little downwards in the part that is beneath the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and apply cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backwards a little;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and apply cauterization in the thigh, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the thigh opposite the cauterization that is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press with your hand, but rather open it widely as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some old man said that no one uses fire cauterization similarly to the razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and it hurts because we have said in the aposteme of the foolishness.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the worst
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the worst of what we have said as divisions of cures, and it does not benefit at all, then they add three kinds of cautery that are good for everything.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	In this manner it is necessary to make three or four incisions, in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the foolishness that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be aware of it on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the heart which is next to the mouse, or where the stitches of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After they boil the inflamed nerves until the pain is perceived on the other side, and then they apply the fire cautery, and thus they will have four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that the entire fire cautery is applied to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has obtained purification by long tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Fire cautery is not suitable for hydropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat according to the methods that we have stated in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four fire cauteries around the bowel, and one below the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the thigh.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the fire cauteries be very close to the width of a finger.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After that, leave the fire cautery open for a long time to purify, and do not discontinue the treatment of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have previously demonstrated.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and the anular.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and raise your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not insert it too deeply, lest you would push back the yellow watery fluid, and let the cauterizing iron be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Afterwards, apply two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cutellaire.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be of a length, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries on for a long time without removing them, so that the water goes out.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatment of other treatments that we have said.
de la menoison	of the menorhea
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a stomach problem comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you do the great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and 4 cauteries within the subtle bowel to all, and 1 cautery subtly on the clavicle, and 2 cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them undergo cautery on the fingers, and apply cautery to each spot, and small cauteries on the stomach below the waist, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or several, and are ancient and are of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you do cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Here is the translation:
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflating, then he puts a great cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clavicle cautery.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery be applied for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing, let the limb be sound.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness that is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you touch the bruise, heat up the cautery that seems to be the remedy, and then apply it all burned on the touched bruise.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand stay there until the cautery reaches the origin of the vein, so that the blood flows freely.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do it once or twice, and if there is much bruising, cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of swollen eyes, profitable as long as they are healthy.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the affected area, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure the pain of a high temperature, which we will describe in its place, then comes such an illness that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and casts putrid and corrupted moisture, if you want to prove all of a subtle tent, and beware that you know all of the tent how deep it has.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery that seems to be a remedy, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tenderness has entered, and recommence the cautery as long as the corrupt and rotten flesh is burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of their need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and guard against irritating the nerves that are affected, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, so guard against these evils, and do not make those false passages in the flesh, and think that it is not a permanent wound.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after healing the flesh until it is healthy, and if the wound is sealed, and the materials are removed long afterwards, then know that the wound is entirely healthy.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the materials are not removed, it means the joints are twisted, and the bones at the font are corrupted;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus like one of those that we will direct to its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from fracture comes with cracks, and great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization on the cracks on one side and on the other to the clavicle, which we have mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we place the cauterizations in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and fragile from fracture and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then it is necessary to perform cauterization on the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic area begin, and one on the right side and one on the left side, and each cautery should be as long as the width of a thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and you make a fire cautery on the back, where it is swollen above.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cauteries be shaped according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, it feels great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and make the cautery on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauteries be shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends to the box of the thigh, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the looseness of the department is visible, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the box of the hip to a cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the joint within the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of large olives, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the wounds.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until he is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the ankle
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the box of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment is not effective, and the disease is ancient:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick, foul humors with filthy pills or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After doing cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of doing cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	it is to know simultaneously burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the surface of the thigh three triangular cauteries in this form, and make a good depth and large, and have between each cauterization the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on top of the thigh, because there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, one should cauterize with a circular cauterization that we mentioned before in the case of dislocation of the thigh;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the skin are soothed by heat.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And it is the manner in which one does on the thigh, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach as far as the knee nor as far as the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it reaches the thigh and leg, have them apply two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and three fingers above the ankle on the left side a little.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery be gentle, and let the heat of the skin be soothing.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers from the foot or near the ankle, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is necessary, have them do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, have them apply a cautery with a gentle or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery so much that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have performed fire cautery on the shin of the foot, and they let it be so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted all over the feet.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a flux of stomach from which he got death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, perform fire cautery on one and on the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men teach about cautery of the thigh, that it is in this manner, make a iron like this and let it be at the top as big as a turnip seed, or a little less, and let it be between the skin and the muscle, and some of them are from one skin fold to another, measuring the quantity of a thumb's width.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the skin folds be above two fingers, and let them also be like knots, and have a well-made iron handle.
et c’est li forme:	and that is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is completely red hot and gives off sparks, and then put it on the affected thigh, and turn it towards the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and cauterize once with the cautery iron and let it be for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of joint as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its consequences, and we see few who make use of it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and however these are good cauteries, which can suffer, and there where they are beneficial.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The burning cauteries of medicine are such that you make the instrument at the crossing points where it descends to the edge of the door, and be it of iron or fire at a long perch, and in its height it has II among us, and each one has the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be they open downwards and upwards, and join together in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After putting on the box of the hip to the ailing person lying on his good side, and then you put your hand all on the box of the hip.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After the hand is placed between the two circles of warm water which has been heated by fire, and let it stay there for an hour in the tension, and then the patient suffers from the heat and aridity.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For he finds numbness as if from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the numbness has passed, he raises his hand with the instrument and lifts the warmth of sweet water, and lets it stay thus for three days, and puts on a poultice so that what is black from the burn should be ostended;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it stay three days to purify in a strait;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and that would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds so that they are healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make him an instrument that holds warmth according to what you did for the wound earlier.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and it is the manner of warm water, and I have written it in a treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of alkaline and living chalk, as much of one as the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small opening somewhere so that the tip of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put above that pot another well-plumbed pot, and put on alkaline and chalk and sweet warm water, until there is two fingers' depth of the powders that you will have well ground in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it stand thus until the water descends and becomes warm and clear, or the well-plumbed pot, then take all that water, and pour it on chalk and alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very warm and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauteries of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes other works like fires, and if there are other medicines where one cauterizes well the hinge thus as thesis and honey and nut oil and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where one man was cured of the pain in his ankle and sciatic vein, and he had suffered greatly, and said that there was no other cure, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he was bathed as it is instructed hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And you do in this manner that you take fresh and dry litargire, and crush it well with a little fat, and apply it to the ankle and thigh and leg where the pain is, and the binding.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the bitterness.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a warm bath so that his body is slightly relaxed, and make him enter his bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery for such medicines, unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with fiery cautery, it helps much;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it should be done, the cauteries in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and the warmth of old oil, and place it on the fossa that is between the thumb of the foot and the other called the instep.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry fiery sparks, and heating them at the fire until they become charcoal, and putting them on the wool, and leaving them until they are extinguished;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do it again thus, and do not cease from doing thus until you think by your sense that it comes just to the ankle, and that the pain has ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of the shin".
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by excessive evacuation, or by expansion of cold matter, none of these appearances is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after that the patient is emptied of filthy pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three marked lines of an inch, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery that is called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three or four cauteries on the cautious claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted arm when they lift it, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the posterior spine of the back and in the appearance that comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the cautery of that according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery penetrates any part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see that the cautery is applied around the spine with a piercing fire cautery on two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in a curved area which is in a spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	from the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which the doctor calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to prick on the surface of the foot, you should make a complete cautery at every point that one calls a "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee, three cauteries or four of each part, with all olive-shaped cauteries.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have a greater mastery, then make more, but do not hold your hand firm for longer than it takes for the warmth of the cauter to penetrate.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we mentioned in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the fingers, two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains a point of pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come just as cuts or just as swellings, cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and prepare medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good government for him and you purge bad blood, he will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	about the treatment of swelling
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture comes in the groin, and the bubbles descend to the loins and it is new, then you must cure the view when you look at it, so that it does not harm anyone on that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and he uses things that loosen the belly, if his farts come down from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the bubble is repaired, and put them in your hands, and mark from below the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then burn with fire cautery of the form that it is.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until he is pale and feels sensations.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bulbs to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the ministers hold their hand on it so that they do not turn back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs of the patient, and put the cushion under him and the sergeant on the thighs, and another under the foot that holds his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again another time until you come up to the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and watch subtly that the bubble does not burst when you do the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your operations are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of their years, and of great people also great according to their measure.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, heal the wound with a cautery of borax so that the ecchymosis may be removed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after healing other wounds so that it may be healthy, and lay the patient forty days on their back so that the wound may be well suppurated;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he gets up to go to the chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made poultice is applied to him, and it is left on for forty other days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and he should have good rest, so that he may exert himself little and beware of too great repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high pride.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he makes this instruction, he will be entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will describe hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come to other areas and are chronic, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then make the fire cautery of the same quantity, and be careful with the third degree of burning.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with the fire at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the level of the notch and make a line according to the width above the root, and another below, and hold your hand in all the fire of the cauterizing instrument.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more moderate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any member (or limb)
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to a member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torsions and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healthy from the first cautery, it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	by this name, recommend another cautery on that one, for such is the custom that it must be changed in the limb that is nearest to it, because it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of sickness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The messengers are often helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	You cannot see that it is cauterized, take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the chief.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I place my head at the nave, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the veins;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and it (the cautery) is on the two horns, and behind towards the hollow of the armpit;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I leave it (the hand) so that the cautery comes just to the bone, and until the scabs fall off if the vapors of the gross humors can issue forth;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the worse according to what is before it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the mixture is scattered throughout;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it appears manifestly, if it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries that we have said above, and one cautery on the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one on the chest and another on the flank, and two on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and it is on the joints, and it is on the Dou Pis tendons, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are on the last ridge of the spine, so you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never make a cautery on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more you do cautery, the more it does harm, and it doesn't profit;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy and sense it, because the body is already totally corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After healing the wound with flour paste mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and emplasters, and it is not completely healthy, then you should make cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauteries be a little deep within the breadth of the skin;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wounds so that they are healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And often one makes a cautery at the hand and at the foot and at the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is stopped, the swelling disappears;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and never intervene unless one is knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of abscesses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the engines of medicine are worthless, then cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the breadth of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then heal with flour of fenugreek and of lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of the colon and blood of the almond tree, each a part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be wholly together, and let it be tied with a bandage, and let it be elevated to the position until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of cancer by cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a cancer appears at its onset, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that forms a circle, entirely around the tumor.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And meanwhile the wise men say that one should also perform cautery at the milky white spot of the cancer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and meanwhile this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to avoid it happening;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and more rightfully, it is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When some have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays from being cured or due to the superfluousness that it does or due to the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and has little blood, or due to the tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you hasten to amputate:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then you cauterize around a lot of small cauterizations by pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	after that, let it be so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she hastens to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you perceive the entire fire cautery, heat the cautery to the form it is.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" so that the cauteries penetrate to the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels them deeply in some manner that the course of the purification is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire through iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a mangling of a limb, for it eats away the members just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat the small and large clavicle cauterizations very much, according to what is suitable for the patient or where the disease is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	after you cauterize all parts as much as you can reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted may be destroyed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and apply to the limbs cauteries suffering from burning with oil until the burns of hot fire are eliminated, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of swollen eyes producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then recommence the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limbs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this mangy condition is often cured by medical treatment with fire cauterization in the patient's limb;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but every way fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of the medicine for the disease in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take the amount you have in hand.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that our feet are affected by a disease called "clothes" according to our intention, and it is a big faulty thing which affects the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this disease are in two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is that you heat it, I heated cautery as if it were a pen of vaulted wood, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and that it has subtle margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	afterwards, put it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail until it reaches to the bottom of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it stay thus for three days until it begins to discharge pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a plaster of wild, savage, bruised mallows with oil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the limb of inflammation by cleaning it so much that it becomes healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are turned away by bad ulcers on the body, and often occur on hands and feet, it is necessary that you apply warm water cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in such a manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a iron rod or a hollow tube, and place it on the nail and the joint, that is to know if there are varicose veins;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the rod on it so that it penetrates all around, then I put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the rod reaches to the root of the nail, and thus finds the warm water way down to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the warm water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it thus, and it will remove everything to its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Here is the translation:
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some shiver with cold or nerve weakness, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you apply three or four fire cauterizes on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive-shaped cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if you leave the shivering, and hasten the santifying of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of painful pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Never appear by default through the body's baths, or pus-filled pustules, that come from gross corrupt materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	if it is necessary at first when they appear that one should apply fire cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle fire cautery of myrtle wood, so that the pointed end is heated by the fire, or from the root of a long aristology, or with a lentiform cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow worse from then on, but are freed from the superfluities that come with them, and are healthy.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great flowings of blood from the artery that is cut into the wound that comes to the surface, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And always when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold very tightly so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue forth anymore;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then apply to the fire the olive oil cauterizers, more small and large as they may be, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take I, or large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply the cauterizer to that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterizer there until the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens to burst forth when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease from doing one after another until the wound is completely cleansed.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not irritate the nerve that is weakened, and that another evil does not come onto the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when the wound does not close over the artery, one cannot well restore it in the meantime while the artery is large, if it is not by one of the three methods that we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to restore blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and be tied and held firmly in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the stanching of the blood in a narrow place, either by wrapping tightly with cloths or by putting things firmly on, or similar things, does not profit unless it is done promptly.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly bind until it is restored above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the finger, but the mill of cold water often so that it be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and rested;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make an inquiry beforehand about those things which he has need of cauterizations and of medications.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have said in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire, or with burning medications, and the instruments and causes and materials and forms of cauterizations;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed that chapter of the loin just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method by which one finds more easily what one wants to cure.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin it, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one on cauteries, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you do not undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such who are wounded by their illness so that they die easily because of the weakness that they find in their disease, and the greatness of their evil.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and of these things one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these there is one who gives his judgment, and says:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is despised.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but rather put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those things of which you are certain, and of which you can take and lose.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your diseases so that health may be converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to acquire good renown, glory, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lord gives you good understanding and direction, and may you be willing to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here is the translation:
dou chief plein d’aigue	a full head of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	You know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the womb holds the child's head too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it happens because of a response given by one who does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I never saw this illness except in children, and nearly all those that I have seen hastened death;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in certain treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw the child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not be sustained;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so great that it became mortal, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the forehead, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the operations are such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it be as long as two of us, so that the moisture flows;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see there the form of a spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make four incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head overturned on each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	if it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after cutting, remove all moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After holding the incisions with drapings and powders, and I put in wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then dislocate it, and treat the wound with tents and with ointments, and leave the head steady thus, and give to the patient dry meat of little moisture so that the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incising is to look at or open up the head of the abscess, and assemble the point.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it is never in front;
aucune fois derrier;	never behind;
aucune fois en destre;	never to the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then there where the abscess opens, and the filling of the point, and do according to what you have the power;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and take care that you do not cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let flow a little blood, so that the patient dies from the depletion of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not benefit at all, then the last resort cure is the cautery with fire that one uses to cauterize the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary then, when you cut the veins, that the patient makes his head fall back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after you rub the spot with a rough cloth as much as the arteries appear, then stretch out the patient's neck under the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the vein beats, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are a little bent.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the veins of the ankle, then cut one and the other with a sharp instrument in two places, so that the vein reaches just to the bone, and let it be done by the width of the top of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as .ij. fingers deep across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then the blood constantly flows out above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark the ankle and cut just to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and it is necessary to put blood flow there if it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone a point of syphac, if you cut what abscesses burst out from the vein, then hold the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of the migrating (or wandering)
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the migrating pain comes, and catarrh agitates, due to the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by ways of cures of medicine and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauteries, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs on their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and is hardly responsive unless in some homes that are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and when it is responsive, the patient stretches out their neck from some cloth wrappings, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and raises the area with warm water as much as the artery opens manifestly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula-like instrument of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it upwards with pincers, and separate well the tissues that are beneath each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the anvil, then cut according to the quantity of the two joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Because she is not cupped, thus she does not jump the blood entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And let blood flow from six lines, just up to three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two loops of a strong double silk thread, which prevents bleeding from coming before the sewing of the wound, and prevents blood from flowing;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then remove the surplus that is between the two ligatures at that hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a cutting cautery up to the bone as long as the head is coped;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is a moderate work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauterizations are helpful in ending the moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of great help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the cavity with much cotton and places well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are dislocated, if they are treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and with tinctures, until they are healthy;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and without cutting into the artery as much as you observe, if you hasten to do it by cautery, or you apply the virtue of vitriol and hold steady with your hand so the blood is staunched;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you don't have it at hand, put your finger on the spot so the blood is congaled, and raise the spot with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold steady as it is necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is more dead and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cautery the vein with this sharp cautery of two edges, but the edge should be well protected to avoid longer delay for the pain.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less their warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And you should have between the two cuts a space of a large finger's width, and then when you have signed off on both sides, and you pass the burning iron over them until it reaches the bone, and cauterize the vein in both places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let it be separated between the two heads because it is not fully understood from this cautery from start to finish;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that's the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are flowing down into the veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not profit from the cure of medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and feel the forehead throbbing as if with tremors;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and the eyes are tired and moist as if the hair of the papers is fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, so it needs this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "contused cure", and it is that you make for the patient who has this disease the hairs that he has on his forehead, then you make three equal incisions on the forehead according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and it be one of the incisions thus as he does all in the front downward to the knee, and the others he has against the ribs, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are against the ribs.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and withdraw your hand from the continuation of the jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers in traversing joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and prepare a piece of sponge and much of cloth to suck up the blood, then apply the spatula bent to conform to the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision that is to be made at the temple as far as the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape out all the cartilage that is between the two wounds to the entire siphac which is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision as far as the other second, and then extract with this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "scalpel", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is dull, not very sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the scalpel cutting towards the airy flesh at the heart, and the gentle cut towards the bone, and the cut as far as it reaches the middle seam.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And you will cut the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision continues until it reaches what opens in the heart, and then afterwards make a cut in the middle of the fontanelle until the other side.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the blood equally, and press the limb for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put in each fontanelle a tent of old cotton, and put on draped cloths moistened with wine and oil and vinegar, and beware that apostemes do not burst out;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and I will minister great abundance of warm water, then the treatment of anointing with basilicon oil, and other treatments that one uses to cure wounds, until it be healthy.
dou reume des eulz	of the evacuation of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When a vein comes to a customary catharsis, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and the vision is obscured, and the parchments are burned;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and where the head is in the front it gives pain and anguish, and the patient is exhausted;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you know through these accidents that those matters and this cathartic do not come from many veins, and the mother cure that it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another just as wide nearby.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the fracture of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be just up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and stretch out your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then separate between the two lips of the fracture and put much cotton, and tighten with linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then lay on top moistened cloths in wine and oil, and beware of a hot abscess;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is put back, it is necessary that you rub the bone so that flesh begins to grow, then treat with excitant things that make flesh grow.
En teil maniere:	In such a manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take two parts of flour of wheat, and of colofonia four parts, and make an emplaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it to these wounds to heal quickly everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	either grains, or beast, or rock from a mine or similar thing, just like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, as in vetches, beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things, such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When the bone grows in the pierced ear or another manner of thing that does not join to the ear, and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then distill no drop of violet oil or oil of sisament, then administer extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make the condition stern, and stop up the nostrils when the sternum comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times relief comes through this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, then one should try extracting with subtle pincers, because that is the method:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out with the pincers, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then one should try extracting with a subtle hook of small double curvature;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not come out by that, then make a cane of iron and insert the tip of the cane into the perforation of the ear strongly, and block what is around the cane with wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then one draws out in a regular form, because many times relief comes if we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out in that manner, then take glue from where one takes the bones, and put some instrument that is pointed for doing that, and put a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	Then press the gut against the stone or whatever it is, and pull strongly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not burst forth from all these things that we have said, then hasten to open the ear thus, and abscess will flow out, and spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of the opening is that you first make the patient with a head wound healthy, and extract blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small opening at the root of the ear at the fat or depending on it;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the opening be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape according to your power, and suck hastily into your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if there are grains that are inside and they swell, then administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if he cannot issue, if you handle the spatula subtly according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision into that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do it when you think that the grains are moist because of the moisture in the ear, so much that you have made many parts;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case where it falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient uses the discharge of condenser first, and fills the ear with much cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it be placed on that same ear where the pain is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it gets worse from that point, it's bad.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if not, take many pairs according to the length of your fingers, and hold them lightly, and warm them a little at the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put the patient's one or pierced ear on it, and elevate it above his feet from another side, and make a hole of another stone on the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease to make this from stone to stone as long as the water issues forth completely, and thus it will flow completely forth;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, if you take the joint, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire until the most tender joint is burnt;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then redo another part of the joints until the water issue is all out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as it is a pimple and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large body that one can feel it, then prepare an extraction of forceps;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If it opens into void spaces, if they draw them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is its form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most subtle instrument into the ear according to the quantity of the sufferer's pain, then suck formally throughout the candle.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do it often so that all the veins appear.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to issue out, stop up the candle with cotton as I have said in the stone.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not issue forth as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the operation of the veins, and you will find them or treat with distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear through this entire instrument, from which is its form as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let it be of silver or of copper, spread underneath to the small openings, and above spread out to distill.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press within the distillation the copper instrument well-made for that, and if you see take the receiver and envelop it around the tip of the cotton-covered point.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then you pour your oil or your juice, and that which you take from your medicines in the reed, and let the reed be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then thrust into the receiver all the cotton, and press your hand temporarily so that the oil is distilled or flows out of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient feels it within, and let the distillations be a little warm from the fire in this way so that it is distilled into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and beware that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be good if it were.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have some hole in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to men through swelling of wounds, or a born-in abscess within the ear, and these swellings sometimes come in deeply into the ear, if one cannot see it well;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes it happens that the small hole is closed, and one sees it very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes in deeply, if one cannot see it, is a grievous sore in many conditions, and in that which one sees, it is necessary that you put the ear of the patient in the sunlight;
et regarde dedens:	and look within:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the opacity appearing, so that the work has all this spatula-like material from which it is formed:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting both in front and behind, all smooth, so that it does not blister the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the operation is on a new or raw flesh of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers and cover lightly, so that all the flesh is fully opened.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operations are deep in the ear, take a subtle, light razor and heat it slightly by fire, then place it in the course of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the operation where the patient feels great pain at the ear, touch lightly and be careful not to disturb the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and apply it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do nothing for several days until the wound is suppurated, or take a tent and apply it with rose water, and powder with pulverized vitriol.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and apply another tent coated with a mixture of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is gone.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal him until he is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if a flow of blood comes, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the flow of blood which are treating with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of the papyra (paper-like skin)
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	These are the ulcers that come in papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you treat them with tongs and tweezers, and cover with a spatula of their roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on the place a vitriol ointment.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it does not peel off, then the subtle lenticular fire cautery, and the cautery man is worth more after the incision.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times they repair, as long as nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the scab
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times there come in papers of eyes some things that seem fat in their shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take warning that the joint moves from one side to another, and it's a light thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	make the wound somewhat large, then scrape the skin of each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and cover it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot cover it without piercing a little the paper, do not harm anything to the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the fracture is large, assemble it with a bandage, and care for it until it is healthy;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not use force, for the joints restore themselves quickly and do harm.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the joint is deep inside the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and stretch the joint with pincers, and cover and press from one side to another;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the skin is separated by incision, it does not hurt at all;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the artery is cut, if you lift the eye of salt water, and heal the limb of those who are injured in such a way that the patient may be healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fatness that is inflamed in the membranes of the skin above, and this happens more to infants than to old people, and hurts much their eyes, and they come to have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because of this they lay their faces down again, and sleep on them, and their skin is beneath their eyebrows moist which the inflammation and appearance have covered with the exinach that opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand against your arm and feel the numbness entering within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the surgery is such that the patient puts their head in a healthy position;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that each part contains, then place it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the skin is gathered together within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make a milestone of the moisture at the cutting edge, making a cut as large, and not more than the wound that one makes in the vein's sinew;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin deep enough so that you reach the skin;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many arrangements comes the skin from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Then pull away a piece of cloth firmly between your fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and beware that you do not push into the crack, that you do not come to the entire spatula just up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the extremity does not open at the beginning of the crack, then increase it a little more lightly so that it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then extract it as we have said, then wrap in oil and in water, and put on the limb, and hold with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break their own arm and put it back to correct the moisture that has gone bad.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if a hot abscess comes to the arm, then treat it with soothing ointments until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When in papers hairs are wrongly aligned other than naturally, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring on ways of illnesses such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so that it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and it is the treatment according to three manners:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	where by fire cautery, or by medicinal agua according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your healthy side, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is converted, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	see that not, if you push a needle to the thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be along the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and draw the thread above to the entire paper, and turn it to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the part below the paper, below the aligned hairs, to the entire spatula coping, from the large lantern up to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into toes.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if you have a part that is master of the craft, take a large quantity of paper according to how much the paper is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make all spatula-shaped on the two lines that you have signed, and begin with a large lantern just up to small.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the incisions be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the heel, then scrape everything.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips to a stitch of a needle with all the subtle thread of flax, and suck out the blood, and make straight the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows at all gluey things, if you want to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if it does not work, then abandon the treatment, and leave the stitches and threads until three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then cure the wound without tight constricting things, because the skin revives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the constricting is muted (as the ancient said), and it's work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another manner:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you shape the skin into a figure that is as if the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, at three ounces of scarification according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then apply to those who have small equal forces in harmony with the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the power to hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or it has one thread, and put it in the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and put another thread from the large lantern, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin on which you have signed, as we have related, then assemble the two lips of the wound by constricting, and cure until it is healthy;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, calm the angry swelling with similar gentle touches.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if it is necessary, you should use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of wounds is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you convert the parchment and make them inside according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle links as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut as two heads of two parts or you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly above what overflows from the parchment of the eye, and stretch out the two wounds of the two parts fully;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it thus for some days, and the skin that is constrained will become numb and weak, and porous, until it falls apart by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it delays, if it resists to some forces, then cure it until it is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will not prick the hairs anymore;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and it is the form of the two canals that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and you thread a soft and subtle silk thread;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's length;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange in the chase another subtle thread of silk briefly, and tie the two heads of the thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head in a healthy position;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be exposed to the sun so that the operations may be clarified, for this is a subtle and minor operation, then insert the needle at the root of the hair being treated, and make it pierce the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then extract the hair up to the root, and put into the root that hair, if there is one or two or three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then extract your hand so that the hairs come forth from the root in the paper along with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the root is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then pull the root downwards along the entire thread that you had ordained, so that the root comes forth from the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you should thread the bow and the filament, and close the eye and let it stay closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh begins to form.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are small, accompany the long hair of the natural whiskers, and be elevated with that or you leave it, until it is elongated and then set free.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purification of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the porridge comes into the eye, if there are two manners of it:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a blow, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of operating on it is that you sew up the wound, and separate the lips of it, and put in threads of linen, and leave it until it be healthy;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not suitable that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	Because if you do this, the disease will return worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I observe things that soothe, as in fenugrec;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose water or alta and linseed oil should be heated, and ointments of dyaquilon melted into one of the oils, and I enveloped a tent, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your cure is that you take heed that it does not sink according to the form it was in beforehand;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and this work that we have said is not stronger than the symptoms of this disease, so that it does not relapse according to the form it was in beforehand.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which is disfigured, truly named "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the work in this is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the thread comes out at the head of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then the flesh is above all the spine, and the coping to the spatula is wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the skin returns according to what it needs, that's good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take the rasp and put it in the fissure, and turn the skin, and make two fissures or sew within the skin;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and be the heads of the two fissures at the two angles of the incision that you have coped, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is just like the shape of a letter which is not "I griesche";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are agreed upon below, from what follows the skin, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the treatment with those softening medications that we have mentioned, and tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a crack or a stitch or a burn, then it is necessary that you make a plain crack beneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is here before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to be ingenious in every way so that they can make the figure return to its natural shape;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the same patients, according to what is necessary for the work and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	because of the burning of the parchment
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this join has to be made in such a way that the paper above is stuck with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural work, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it high;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and hold the pincers, as long as you grasp what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too pointed nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula is too pointed and does not bleed the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and make your incision, where you scrape off the assembled one lightly, so that the skin regains its natural shape;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it is healthy throughout the assembled one, and they never make salty aqueous humor in the eye, and they raise sweet watery discharge, and from the collar bone;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put between the skin and eye a linen bandage, and place on the eye a wet linen cloth in abundance of egg whites;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day, use sweet collar bone and things that follow, until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail is according to two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nervous and resembles the hardness of a firm, dry cord, and another which is not nervous, but resembles the softness of a moist, congealed blain, that when touched with iron and cut with pinces, it cannot be removed;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and one and the other resemblance begins towards the large artery, and grows little by little until it covers all vision and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts their head in a healthy position, then they open their eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lift the paper with your hand, then bend the finger into small doubles, and stretch it out above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and insert the hair of a horse, or of a cow, or of an ox, and pull it strongly;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and stick it in the ankle, and pierce all the way through the needle, and tie the ankle with a thread and hold it from above, and scrape off all the hair on the side of the ankle that connects the prune and the skin to the hair just at the head, then cut the remaining part into the root of the arm at all subtle and small forces, and let the natural flesh or arm, so that by incision do not disturb the course of the tears accustomed.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes it happens that the ankle is held back by the oncine alone, and with a thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then scrape off all the subtle skin where it is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And beware that the subtle skin does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the prune does not perforate;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour a little of warm broth into the oil, and make a poultice with it from litharge, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat what is necessary so that it may be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the needle, and the veins cannot enter, often this type of nail is cured by medications;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and it grows thus as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the oil of the patient, and take the spatula lightly a little gently according to this form;
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes to a point and the reason presses on, then distill from your mouth into the oil made with litharge and red copper and warm broth, and stop up the oil until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then resume the other work according to this same method, so that it is all ordered.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to the eye, then as an aposteme heats up, then milk it, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healthy, then restart the treatment as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh wounds at night with great annoyance, if it suspects in the ankle, and cuts into one part and not entirely, that course of tears does not come;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then distill in the eye a red collar which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	It is the eyes of some men that never saw red flesh, and covers the prunella and holds back on the papers and turns to the deceiver, and resembles a rose of baluster.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the works are such that the patient puts his head in your healthy tone, then he opens his eyes, and gathers all that flesh as convenient joints to that, and holds it with force;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cut the first flesh, and go all cutting to the raspier until the end, and beware that you do not blind the eye at the work;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and it is the incision of a spatula-like tool that we have mentioned in the incision of the ankle and with small forces, because one should loosen the swelling as the form shows after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of a broiet seed or you distill coliere rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the oil a layer of cotton with a stream of egg white, so that it be assured against a hot abscess.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it remains nothing, and the blood flows excessively, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing things that calm a hot abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make sure that the flesh is adjusted in the oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	However it is necessary that you adjust the treatment according to the natural weakness of each oil.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in the work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	from the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	There are veins that are red and covered on the eye, and take away its function and obscure the eye every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the oil, in which the patient is afflicted, it is outside, and there is no other disease except the outer one.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then the coil in such a manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in your healthy one, then suspend those veins all around according to his wisdom, and let the subtle double onions be according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be an eleven-inch incision by degrees in this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then you should coil the veins subtly with force, and suck out the blood hourly after another, until you see that you are removing those outer veins from the oil.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and beware that you do not blind the eye at the points of the spatula, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not seize except those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collirium to corrupt what is dormant due to the evil of the belly.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are not able to collect all this at that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and assured of hot abscess, then resume according to this manner which is before until it be healthy;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and that is the form of the fractures:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mirror, thus named "arissati", a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat with fire cautery and with ardently burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not without health, if there is an abscess within which you make an incision, there where it should be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take away all the instruments of which it is the form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "rough head", and let it be made into an iron instrument at the rough head, and let it be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the rough bone of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the rough bone with excitatory medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the eyes are inflamed, and there is a burning sensation, and the body of the bowel is inflamed, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not improve and is not apostematous, and bad accidents come to pass, showing that it is unhealthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If this does not work, then there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to the hole of the nostril according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you discover the bone for the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it has been discovered, take the forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the fistula should be attenuated up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone of the injured arm, and separate your hand from the eye of the hole, then turn all the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by this means that the veins come into being if he holds his hand against his nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the limbs, thus goes the material to the nail;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are open everywhere, and it does not come to disturb the nail, nor diminish, thus it is necessary that you read the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the vein, then apply ventouses or a hot iron without piercing to suck, then put on the eye a linen cloth made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye, and bind it with strips and drapery;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the way of the strips is that you take strips quite soft, and fold each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then hold it back above a hardened bandage, forming a shape, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck out the infected matter without piercing the skin.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the cupping glasses and hold the eye steady day and night, and if the veins are swollen, it is necessary that you extract a lot.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the vein after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it's good.
se ce non;	If not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you reapply the plaster and the bandages and the vein and the cupping glasses until he is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing of a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When cracks appear in the web-like membrane, then open, and issue forth fragments like grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see the web-like membrane, the operations are such that you insert a needle at the root of the affected part below, then insert another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the arm.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and have them pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then thread the eye of the double file, and tie one part of the tube around it, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place it on the same moistened spot in abundance of egg whites;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the thread absorbs with the egg whites, then heal the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and often the wound is held in place by a piece of cloth in a circle, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes have great appearance, then pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and correct the moist albuginous and descends the eyes, and enters in between;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the hollow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but a swelling that is assembled in the eye, appearing as if it were dripping, and this is not really dripping;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the appearance of the disease is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and upright, then take the head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the swelling come up to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then be fixed, and do not bend down and be disordered in the light, and see the patient's things as if he were alone;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is dripping, and the descents of the swelling are not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and touch the corner of the horn-like tissue by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the horn-like tissue and the crown, until the swelling subsides;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is dislocated, if you distill into the hot oil mixed with honey, or hot oil or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then it should be treated with another treatment until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	from the corners of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the similarities of the hot oils in the division, and this is what is necessary to pierce;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if it operates according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind the healthy oil strongly and tightly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper of the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a rope in that whitish part of the eye at the minor tear-let, then apply the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand until it penetrates into the whitish part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measurement of the way of almagda be at the forefront of the measurement of the spaces which are from the prunelle just up to the end of the blackness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument just where the water is, then press it down one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation:
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting a little, and if the water rises by the second way, place the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not mount, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back in water a small gemstone, and lift from it the eye within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then puts by default the eyes stupefied or clouded with rose oil and in abundance of egg whites, and mixes it with healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our time, put on common broth with an abundance of egg whites.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which is the form.
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then prick the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deeply in fear of piercing, but make a subtle incision, then apply alum, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the operation appear to the patient in a darkened room, where he sleeps on his back in a gloomy light;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be deprived of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then disengage him in the same darkened room, and test his vision, and make him see no things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not suitable that you do this in the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water mounts quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	Here is the translation:
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is alleviated, if he dislocates the view and puts his face in the mirror to cover any flaw, and so then it is in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then he leaves the small house little by little, and turns into his cases;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the Iraq, who told us that in his country they made a certain alumgaude powder, which attracts the water, but meanwhile I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the similarities of the forms of alumgaude, because those who do not know them see them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they should be prepared properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of the bone in this subtle precision, and the last one at three angles aigu.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Never grow or produce various diverse char marks, from which there are some that resemble scorptions on the foot.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there is such a mark or a char with an enhanced fixed color, and if it has a soft char of a bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that case of those chars which are soft and not enhanced, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and throw the onion at those chars, and remove the fierce fires.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then take that which you have in your hand to sustain on the subtle spatula skillfully from one side, until you know that this char is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that cannot be covered, open it completely with the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if you find no swelling, or a warm abscess, if you touch it as it suits;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned away, then apply either oil or water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the wound does not open, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not pass as it suits, know that there is new flesh growing in the bone above, for which the instruments do not come to cut;
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then it is necessary that you put a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and sew with our hands, and have between each stitch of space a doit or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient's head in the noose of the thread at his nose as it suits, and pull gently until it comes through the nose into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times they act like a child in school, it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes by the nose to one hand, and the other head that comes by the mouth to the other hand, and let them follow each other in being sound as we who are or were.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this as much as you know that the nodes have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian oil, and put it back in place as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put on the nose a plaster of lead for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of dry medications, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and it is the shape of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill oils and medicines or not:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	Whether of silver or copper, resembling an overturned lamp, like a chain, and the conduits thus;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, make a closed chain, and let the instruments be flat for purging the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and hold the handle to the head to keep it still when one heats the oil or some liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh above the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a tumor grows on the head which is called "telul", and it increases and becomes large again, until it is a visible thing to behold;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason you must cut into the tumor at the beginning, and clear out everything, then put on top the cautery or the burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you delay cutting until it is large, take care if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch the iron with your hand because it is an enchanted abscess, for when you touch it sometimes, great evil comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that one can cover it completely, if you examine the patient and touch it without fear, and heal the place with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is affected and ulcerated
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when continuous solutions come into one of these cartilaginous openings, it profits little, because in some homes.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is necessary therefore to see if it has reached none, if you look at the wound to see if it is fresh in all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bring the two lips of the wound together with a suture, then heal it until it is healthy;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their skin until they heal, then bring the two lips together with a suture, and hold them in place, and sprinkle powder made from dragon's blood, and incense broiet;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place on the poultices a piece of plaster of strong or another plaster suddenly, and let it stick to him, then heal the joint so that it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the fracture is that you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the fracture of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	At times men have within their lips hard abscesses, similar to grains of peas, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and split on each nut, and take them as pincers and cut into each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the remedy afterwards, after the incision of vitriol broth, until the wound is stained;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply the oil of iris, and heal the wound with dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the decay of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often it happens beneath the gums where it is pressed, which the ancient ones call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	it is necessary that you hold it as in tongs, and cut at its root, and let the blood or sap flow;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then apply on the affected place a glassy powder, or other drying and constricting powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if it returns after the incision, and often happens, then cut a second time, and cauterize;
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	Of the abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are laid and pressed;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes they are black, yellow, and green teeth, as long as the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth are putrid;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and their head be in your holy, and take the teeth or the scars appearing, until there remains nothing.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus make of the blackness and the greenness, and of the yellowness and the other stains, until they are wiped away.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes that which is at the first rash, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then recommence to re-treat on the second day and the third, until you have everything ready.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that one extracts between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others be with you equipped.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat a tooth with its pain that you delay to handle it as much as you can, for this must not be done hastily.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance just up to then so that one has no excuse to delay.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to receive treatment, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth that hurts.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in a sound tooth, and makes them handle the good tooth;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and always the pain does not depart from that, as much as the bad one is extracted, for we have already wanted to do it to these healthy ones;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are very certain of the tooth that is hurting, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides, strongly plying the gum with a spatula to ward off from all parts;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it with your fingers or subtle nails at the first little by little, until it is well loosened, then firmly affix the nails.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the head of the patient be in your holy hand between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and insert it gently into each part lightly, and you remove it just like you did at first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the teeth are pierced and gnawed, it is necessary that you fill them with cloth, there where the holes are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you hold it subtly in the tendons, so that it does not break while holding.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to operate very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you do well to beware that you do not break it, and leave a part remaining, and reveal to the patient by the wickedness of the root more great pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeon, who through their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have recounted.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but they often come through the examination of this great illness for the roots that remain, or for the cartilage that they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is extracted, you wash the jaw with wine or vinegar and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and we stop the bleeding that comes, which often happens, by applying the juice of bruised vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if it does not heal, you should cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the instruments, which you should blunt first, so they are at long points and thick handles, so they do not slip when you extract the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of large limbs so they do not bend in the traction, and let them be of iron well-made, and let them be toothed to hold firmly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the socket, it is necessary that you place on the jaw a cotton cloth soaked in borax or butter I day or II, as long as the gums are softened, then you apply the tongs called "algefri", from which the head seems to be a beak of a sign.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be made thus, like a file, and that is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to issue from all these pincers, then it is necessary that you discover the flesh entirely surrounding the root, and he puts on the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a palate scraper, from which this is their form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so it does not break, and if its roots spring forth from that, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If that's not so, help with all the instruments, because of which the forms come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has several grooves, from which the form is:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front of the dens' ratio, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which the form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be strong so they cannot break, and know that many of these dense instruments are.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the diseases show them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach about instruments due to the diversity of wounds; and one breaks a part of the cartilage or other bones, or it becomes porous, if they seek those instruments that they need, which I have told you, and help with gestures, from which this form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let it be thick and holding well to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but it can hold and ostend.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the limb with suitable medications for this, and if it has porous bone, and it is small, so take into account all of this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not in accordance with the natural body, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, so it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot solder or file:
adonques lou raie;	then the root;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument which has the shape, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be of iron sharp in the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping is little by little in the morning hours for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file with a similar file as its shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file with which one makes the needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in a gentle manner, little by little, he puts his teeth together gradually, so that it does not move until it settles.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the flat surface at the end of everything without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, it is necessary to file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front tooth falls out, either by shock or by decay, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you treat them with constricting medications, but it is of no value.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	it is necessary to hold them back with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and decays, but the gold does not move at all.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the threads be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	And if you want to realign the teeth, take the thread and double cord between the healthy teeth, then put the heads between the crooked teeth, even if there is one or more, until you straighten them right up to the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then reestablish the covering right up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so that it does not move at all;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the heads of the thread at a small nail, and assemble them, and put them back between the healthy tooth, and set it so that it does not touch the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	And then leave it tightly in place as long as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the threads break, hold it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it delays and serves thus all its tension, and it is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and of the two muscles, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, if you replace it in its place, fresh from fresh, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not intervene with those who are not wise and suffer, and never make the form of a tooth from an ivory tusk, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it steady as we have said, and delay and serve thus long tension.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the thread of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never is this bond that comes from under the tongue or naturally, which one is born with;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accidental wound suddenly;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold his head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then cut the nervous thread as long, until the tongue is dislocated from its hold, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it's a sudden wound, if you cut the uncleanness and cut as long that binds.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and beware that the fissure is not too deep in the front, because of the artery which is underneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done it, lift up the level of warm water and of hazel, or of cold water, then place underneath the tongue a tent of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and touch the patient's gum each night, so that the levels cannot become swollen.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if a flow of blood comes, then place on the level a vitriol poultice;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize it with a slow-burning cauter, which is good for that;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Then the treatment of another treatment as long as he is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see that the abscess is of a foul color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it declines to a whitish color, and there is moisture, so he throws in the onion, and makes an ointment of a subtle spatulum, and delivers from one part and another.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the blood does not come to your work, so put on a glassy broth as long as it is stained, then return to your work as much as you treat everything fully.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then raise the level of vinegar and of oil, and the treatment of other treatments as long as he is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes there come within the throat ulcers that are called "godath", and they are properly called the II abscesses, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, take heed.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is abscesses hard of little sense and of fused color, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron, also for the deterioration of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will divide it, where it would break by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color returning, and the root is subtle, then have the instrument ready to cut, but first see that the abscesses are calm and appeased.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be in your hand, and open their mouth and take the scissors between their hands, and press the tongue beneath all the instrument, so that it is in the form;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or of subtle iron also as a kind of knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you press the tongue against this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and place it in the amulet, and make the trajectory flow above more than you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and draw nothing from the tiles with it, then cover the instrument, because it is the shape, which seems like a force;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all ways the head is curved, and one end to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take a candle with tongs, because it is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And it is cutting on one side, and named on the other side;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And when you have covered one of the amulets, if you cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and dry, and if there is evacuation of blood, then gargle the patient with hot water, or scorching of green pomegranates which are cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is stanched;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then let the wound heal until it is healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and another time abscesses do not grow in the throat besides the two mandibles, if they are treated thus like the two mandibles are treated.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I medically treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, it is to know the small abscess of little sense;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and it had almost closed off her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the constricted passage, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high up that it had pushed through two openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened then, and made an incision in one of the tonsils, then the flow of pus was abundant, and a large portion of it poured out.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I made another incision in the other perforation of the nose, and I opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After making an incision in these abscesses, and cutting into a part, only a little blood comes out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And then the woman's throat constricted, and now she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting into that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscesses grew back again, and filled the void that I had emptied, so much that it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Then I deceived him and cauterized inside his throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Then he waited without growing worse;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I left those regions, and knew only that God did it afterwards.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the humors descend to the womb, and it is inflamed and it is long, then it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is swollen and round, then it is called "womb".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, and you see that the ulcerous abscess is alleviated, and it is subtle, so it is necessary that you cauterize it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one that is rounded and gathered, and is not lengthy;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is blood-red or of a dark color or black, so it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then prick the onion in the urine, and extract it from beneath, and cauterize with one of the two instruments that I have said for incising the two veins.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not operate more fiercely than the surplus which is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you operate more, it harms the voice, and the speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two handles, and cure it until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear about operating, it is necessary that you use gentleness in the cautery of the senses for fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of burning by cautery is sharp and bitter.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts their head in your healthy hand, and then presses their tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confirms with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using the handling of this instrument, from which there is the shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have on the head a hair or where one puts the medicine, like the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument to apply all the medicine onto the wound;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	And the patient should be leaning on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth to the medicine inside, so that it does not descend into the throat, and the blister.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	Then put your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the eye, for a quarter of an hour, until you see the inflammation and the bites of the medicine are alleviated.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around an instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and apply the instrument to all the affected area above, until the cotton adheres onto the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this frequently, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and expect to see results after three or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have need to restart the cauterization of the medicine, then restart it, and after cauterizing, clean around the eye with cotton dipped in boric acid, and clarify what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let there be risen from cold water, and let there be cured of garglings as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is safer than incision, not that the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	it is cured of fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it in a gentle heat, and make it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and in the pot has an instrument prepared in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And let it be of silver or of copper, and let one of the heads be thrust into the patient's mouth as long as the vapors rise to the eye through the cane, so that the eye is mortified;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the remedy is repeated often, until the eye dries out, and be careful that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, for many things happen there;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make a bigger wound than at the decline of an abscess's fall.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and place a thread of egg white in the chief's head, so that the patient's mouth does not burn too much;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the egg white thread does not let the bad vapor hurt the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether for salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it happens to have an obstruction in the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit thus, so that the food is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance if he vomits the bitter thing
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	where the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and there is a thread on the sponge, and then it passes through;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the place, if it sticks, and then you will draw out strongly;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out from what we have said, take the instrument of a probe according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all comes out, and do not push the bone within;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows when the thing is bitter;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If you apply heat below, or if you pull it out completely with the instrument evenly, so that it is straight.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the sensitivity of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No medicine is effective, as I said in the section, through the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not benefit, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, then press the tongue to the instrument as I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the bruise, take it all to the small inch, or with subtle tendons that come to this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a curled hair, and put it in the patient's throat, then put or make the curl of the hair into a hot iron, and make it sweat.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And tease the patient with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take full sight of cold water, and open the mouth, and let it glide in sensibly, and move it with its own hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if the patient soon feels the water, he recovers.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if he does not recover as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asphalt, to the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the womb;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall more gently.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible charcoal bits, and it should be covered with a perforated sheet in the middle, and in this pierced one should be the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then you throw in the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the sanies;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the sanies will now purge, and if they do not purge, then recommence the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and let the patient sweat, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then the liver will be cleansed by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument through which one draws the sanies is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tongs for drawing mucus into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it has resemblance to a healthy nose, and it has roughness of lime, so that what she takes, she cannot let go;
et vez ci la forme:	and see there the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the surgeons of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and in size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two manners, of which one is in its own resemblance, and because of what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is by means of the eyes or where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the body are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if there are abscesses that one must not pierce, as long as the bowel is ripe according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are on the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves them until they are ripe on the outside, perhaps because the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is on a principal limb, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will injure the principal limb;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	where it is of the foundation, if one pierces thus so that it dies;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not suitable that you pierce an abscess without complete digestion, unless it is of the foundation, so that it does not putrefy within, and is lengthened, and a fistula forms;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which dies according to completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the departures from the fever, and the diminishing of the pain and of the redness, and the debating and adjusting of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make a hole for the perforation or more depending on the abscess, and where it opens badly;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and it is the perforation of a long wound in the body, and if the abscesses are in his hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equal places where there is no putrefaction.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, they complain, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is better that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce before that, so the body is poisoned by his own venom, and it is full of much filth;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps they harden the lips and the depths of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you diminish small abscesses, small perforations;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many fissures according to the appearance of the greatness of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the skin, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become so like a drape, and is mortified, if it is necessary to do as one does with pimples;
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are those that one covers thus like the foil of myrtle, thus as abscesses of the loins;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, thus as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected great pus, and you pierce them, so do not drain all the pus at that hour, but drain a part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then staunch the abscess until another day, then drain nothing further there;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times, little by little, until all the pus has been drained;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	meanwhile the patient is of weak virtue, or a pregnant woman, or small children, or old and decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the surgeon operates too hastily with the flow of pus, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Here is the translation:
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a flat wound, you should apply tinctures of flax or cotton wool;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, you should put a tent in each one so that they meet each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a part of soft skin, and you have shaved around it, you should fill it with old cotton or a dressing of linen threads without moisture, and leave it just to the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then anoint it, and treat it with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if you remove blood that has come to the surface during your work, if you calm down the agitated and anxious, and soothe the inflamed area, and put a dressing on the wound that is healing many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the blood deterioration persists, you should apply government and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in my book, and if it is a winter condition, and the joints or abscess are very nervous, you should put on tents and moist drapes soaked in warm wine and oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in this state, and the limbs are numb, then it is necessary that you apply warm drapels to the affected area with water and oil, or with wine and oil mixture, until the third day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then open up the abscess and the wound and the treatment, as it is necessary, until he is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to thoroughly know how to treat abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	as I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where there are small abscesses coming from the head, and they are ways of ours that are in veils, just like the juice of a hazelnut, and much has been seen with similar things.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and such as those where there is moisture, just like pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are some that are hard and stony at the cutting, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the cutter are such that you experience with every instrument that is called "incision", from which the form comes afterwards, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, it flows out above the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is evacuated, then scrape off everything without leaving the skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when you leave nothing.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then thrust a cotton swab into an Egyptian injection, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	But this not, in a pointed instrument and in silk, and fill the wound, and let it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and they run through that which is hardened by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then reinsert the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not harden by night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound of injection with this convenient method, until it be healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscesses hold in a thick knot, then cut according to this form, from afar.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and you scrape the onions, and remove the scab from all parts, and put all your treatment of drawing forth for the quotidian fever where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery does the opposite, then do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And thus do for the abscess if it is pierced, and on cutting and on curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the pierced abscess and the moist, it is lighter, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if there are some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and it was one of the abscesses that I treated on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess was like a stone, rough and whitish, and could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had touched any of it, one would have done as much harm as to a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming on the head, because those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, one must open so that it may be most dependent on the location, in order to issue forth the pus;
et les cure si com il covient.	and the treatment should be as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of the scalps
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times the abscess forms on the neck, and beneath the shoulders, and in the loins, and sometimes it comes to another part of the body, and they are numerous, and are entangled one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its side, just like the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the similarities of these ulcerations are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that then you see of good disposition in the touching, and it is similar to the color of the flesh, and changes from each part and is not at all airy as near the neck nor in the artery, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if it is necessary that you cut through above, and scrape the skin from each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart as oncines, if you are a master, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and pull gently and little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not let the spatula slip, lest the hand fail, and do not push too far, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not stop bleeding, then put on the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound fast.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it be until the abscesses are softened, and the wound is soothed, and begin to make it putrefy.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stagnant, return to your work, until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then seek with your finger if there remain small scrophulae, if they gather and multiply.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is in the root of the vein a large scrophula, it does not behoove that you cut that scrophula at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, then treat.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire abscess, it is necessary that you reassemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more superfluity due to the greatness of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you understand to cut at the root of it, and draw out fiercely, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrophulae that hold a surplus, pierce them there where they appear most tender.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce them thus as the one mentioned before, depending on it, then I will treat them with oil and similar things, so that they corrupt what remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, if the treatment of anointing is done skillfully, so that it may be healthy.
de squinance	of bruising
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	They used to say and talk about the cutting of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and it's the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have a hoarse voice, it is necessary that the partition of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cleared;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one should not help by that alone, because all the veins and the breathing of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it beneath three circles or four a small cut across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the syphac, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and they must be careful at the section of the epiglottis that there is no spot of flesh, and the vessels are long of inquiry.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the masters are afraid, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat all around the tonsils, then cut through the cartilage as far as it reaches the uvula;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and clear the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the syphac, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the tube of the uvula which is forced out by the broken voice, and by the defect of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open a little.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound at the neck, and sew it entirely without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	One must not do this just as long as the throat is completely stuffed, and the patient is judged to death, and the default gives up the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then operate on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and by this command the old man left the wound open so that the evil of the disease would pass, and it passed in three days or four; And then he commanded to cauterize the wound and cure, so that it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took the knife, and she placed it in her throat, and cut part of the sinews of her arm;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, and I found her almost dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that it had not been properly covered, neither vein nor artery, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured her so that she was healthy;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and he did not have at the young woman's fever when she was hoarse of voice, and recovered afterwards to her condition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jasmine, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	where naturalness has no point of obstruction.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which resembles a fatty tumor to us, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from our artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is no fear, and it does not want to open a false flow except in the one that is small, and it proves and searches throughout the entire introgression;
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it thus, as I grasp nothing, and do not find in any vein, if it is covered, if as we cover the nuts, and draw to its entire coffin, if there is no point;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and investigate well everywhere, and heal it as it is fitting, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of wounds, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now it is fitting that I tell all the difference that is between wound and injury.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that injury is heat and fever holding, until the inflammation has passed, and it is accompanied by putridity.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then set aside the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the wound there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus as a boil, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to the second similarities, whether grayish, or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inspecting the abscesses of the nails is that you press or make the skin more moist than you find in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the strumens have perceived the heart, then it is according to the greatness of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the suppuration, and take heed in this, that it bursts forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture flows out, whatever its color may be, thus it is done as I have said about the other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the suppuration no moisture comes, know that it is fat, thus do it in a cross, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and turn the skin where it lies, so that you draw it out whole with the knot.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it straight, pull it by pieces so that there remains nothing.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if it remains nothing, then it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it remains a little, and the wound does not grieve you, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing abscess treatments hot, and treat with other treatments until it is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat what is injuring flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the vein is throbbing against you or otherwise, then hasten and apply the liquid of broken vitriol, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cauterizing what has remained of the tumor.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Here are the forms of inward-turned instruments, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	large, moderate, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, moderate, and small, for enclosing the abscesses of a fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorcels, and they are of citrus iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more proven for enclosing the abscesses of a fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, moderate, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, moderate, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if there are eleven which have three deformities in three ways thus;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if there are eleven which have three deformities, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if there are eleven which have two deformities, and eleven with only one deformity, and they are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is sharp to the point where they are cut, and there are those that do not cut except for one part, from which the nails are scraped, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introjections are the humors collected in the hands, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and gentle, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use more force than in the gentle flesh, as in legs, and arms, and hands, and fingers, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and at no time does one make another instrument small, resembling the scoops of fists, according to this form, for which one staunches blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it nowhere near the place that joins the veins, and the arteries, and nowhere near according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	At no time do they swell the hands of any men when their corruption begins, as much as they seem like women's hands;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain lame and swollen, and who want to cure them, thus it is necessary to soothe according to this form of this line, up to G.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scoop out the fat, and apply the medicinal plaster to the raw flesh, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and cure until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and you press the slender limb down, and it is relaxed by its greatness just like they do with women, if they are in the second rib, through similar fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one is held by the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B to the line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin which is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and prepare what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, so that it be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the corruption of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it heal as much as it absorbs the residue and fat, then cure it so it becomes healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from beneath the seats are kinds of hard scrofulous tumors which have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who hold moisture must be treated according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment to bring healing to those who are wounded.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is similar to scrofula, do it as we have said in cases of scrofula, and if the wound becomes swollen, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is broken, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses come from it, and also it happens that the inflamed vein becomes an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one feels it thus, as it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the strangulation.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is due to the vein, then it appears as a defective rupture.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and likewise when it is under the arms and angles and in the collar bone and many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and he who is in charge should also avoid it, and for he who has inflammation of the artery, make a incision above the skin from afar.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then operate on the waist with onions, and beautifully separate the artery from the membranes, so that it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then insert a needle beneath it, and make it pierce up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two eyes, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then puncture the place that is between the two ligaments of an intermuscular area until the blood flows out which is there, and be freed from the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then bring together the treatment that injures not, so that the ligament heals;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal what is wounded, approaching it, so that it may be healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is on the waist of the vein, it is necessary that you hold in your hand what you can of the abscess to all the skin, then insert the needle beneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	Then burst the abscess, as I have told you, or bind one of the two parts as the head of the vein.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then insert another needle under all the threads beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads steady in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut into the abscess until the superfluid comes out, then cut away the superfluid from the heart and let what is tied loose.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a warm dressing with wine and oil, then apply gentle treatments of tents and bandages until he is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nostrils
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, how abscesses come into the artery and vein, they come into the nostrils when they are inflamed, or from too much hard work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in joints and toes where there are articulations, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many painful conditions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one holds it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not at all in its proper alignment, but beneath the heart.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it must be adjusted from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, neither above nor below, and the one that is in joints cannot be held by iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance it will contract;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those that are on the head or forehead, make the skin on the spatula-shaped.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, hold them with a grasp, and cut into their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, hold it with a clamp, and scrape, then bone and assemble the wound to the sutures, and treat until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of large hanging swellings
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	It never happens in the belly and not another similar part, and it is a disease which is called "fungus" by the resemblance of them, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw some that had II or belly wounds that were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were already split, and immediately corroded from moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces heavy, and the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is such that you examine if the patient's moisture is moist, and the color of the joint is pale and moist and with subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if you touch the spatula to the large one, and thus are in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when cutting, there often come too great flows of blood, and if the senses fail you, then hasten to give a hot cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient is frightened and afraid of the incision with iron, take the well-made thread of a thorn, and place the artery as we have said, and let it be for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then hold back, and do not stop constricting the thread of a thorn until it touches the artery, and ease through it without struggle;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, you should be afraid to cut them in the middle of the belly, but you can easily cut most of it, then cauterize so they do not regrow;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cut the tendon which is of a fixed color and of poor sensation and of lazy regard;
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted chancre hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is ripe
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or incision of the skin, and it is on the belly and in some of the bowls, as it happens in other wounds, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and it is by the routing of the skin's surface and by the issuing of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it resonates, and then returns, and sometimes it is constricted, and increases greatly at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, it does not constrain at all.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are such that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and be stretched out straight, then sign from below around the navel.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then command to place it between your hands, then go into the limb that you have signed to the entire spatula, then examine the majority of the abscess above the entire great groin.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie it with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let us give the joint a solid hold.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open the majority of the abscess extended over the joint, and you push your index finger, and seek the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find the true joint, if it dislocates, and pushes the intestine to the defect of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowel, if it takes to the groin, and covers the superfluity.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery does you harm contrary, or the vein, if it goes badly in, then return to your work and take two needles, and push two strong threads, and push the two needles into what you have done in a cross that you make pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess in three places under the skin, and if you see it, remove the skin, and let the pus drain out until it disperses, and separate the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you cut when it is subtle and porous, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb of what needs to be treated, and sew the limb.
dou chancre	because of an ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken in the division about the similarities of cancer, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should avoid the treatment with iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and say that cancer grows in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in the limb or where it can be rooted like a cancer that is in the breasts, and in the hips, and in similar places, and one must remove everything when it is at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is old and chronic, you must not approach it, for I know of no one who can heal it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	I never saw anyone heal it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the treatments, when it is in its place or where you can open it, as we have said, is that you should purge the patient of black bile several times;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him healthier if he has shown repletion, then prepare the patient for a good place to perform the treatment;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then cut your ulcers or tumors, and shave all parts, and remove all decay without leaving anything.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and press well with your hand or anything, and if the blood spurts out against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of another treatment as long as he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is suddenly inflamed;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch with iron in these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympanitis and hypochondria, for it is mortal things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "inflamed" by medicines, and the treatment does not profit, if you see that the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides dropsy, such as a tumor and solution of stomach and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if you do not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient is very virtuous, and he has no other disease than dropsy only, and it is not too young nor too old, then so should you operate:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	raise the patient's right hand on your hands, and the assistants press the belly in bulging out the water at the lowest part of the thigh, then take the spine of the back according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	to a point, and in no way should it not be so entered that it can come just up to the intestine when one fixes it in, and it cannot be blocked;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look if the dropsy is inclined towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you make an incision thus of the belly, you must straighten up above the navel;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to the disease of the liver, then make your incision on the left side of the belly;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to weakness, let it be on the right side, and it is not suitable that the patient leans on the crack that the surplus flows do not run to the weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand to the entire spatula between the skin and the siphac as if scraping out the quantity of an ounce or so much therein;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the siphac as much as the spatula reaches the empty spot, and it is the level of the water, then pull it back, and you will cut with this instrument in the shape that is there;
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a subtle silver tube, and it is of a lightweight material or alloy, and has a small hole at the lower part;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and where it is narrowed on one side, it has three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and one from another part, and one from another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut like a pen, and it's the shape of the incision where the writers cut the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top is the scalpel, so that when the instruments come to the water, they descend now onto the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty the quarter or third part, for if you empty more than it is necessary at that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the loss of his spirit's arm, or he falls into a swoon, or approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is held back now by the cord which stops up the passage that is on the syphac, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	Then recommend the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and remove a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Do it no day, and keep from flowing as long as it does not remain but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the tomb or gravel heats up, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and you should refrain from drinking.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment with drying medicines so that it be healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	There never grows a child who has no hairs on the penis, or the hairs are small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If you want to pierce as soon as possible without making a large wound, make a very subtle incision according to this form.
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or thrust I into the subtle closure of the bladder, and tie it thus for three days or four, and when it wants to make urine, so be it opened, and let it urinate, and then put it back.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance they do not cover it, for the urine that comes out does not allow them to keep it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Here is the translation:
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the passage in their back are afflicted, for none are born with the passage at the head of the penis, because they cannot urinate until they lift their penis high.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come to the marrow, and it's a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the work is that the patients lie thus on their back, then they stretch out the head of the penis and the skin as well as the length of a pen, so that the passage takes in the middle, just as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of the flow of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then staunch what is bleeding blood, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times they come to this bath, and it is a show of bad flesh.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	you must take them to the subtle onion, and cut and bind all of them, then put on cotton wool in Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with diafinicon ointment until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you must apply fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and the bath is in a similar state to the edge, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the bath that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is cleansed, then heal what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the flesh of the edge will not be perceived, and blackness and corruption come into his edge and in his groin;
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a flow of blood comes, then one must apply the lunar cautery according to this method:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery helps with these two combined dispositions:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	it is to know, at the decay of blood, and at the corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the stick is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary that you apply or conduct a vein's channel of lead, and urinate the patient amidst;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin is dry at the head of the stick which has to do with those who have not been circumcised, or it has to do with a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a sharp instrument, so much that the ligaments are disentangled, and the head of the stick is freed from all parts;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a spatula or some pointed instrument at the head of the stick and of the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then remove the bandage gently between two, and I place the subtle layer of the millstone in cold water, so that it does not dry up again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Surgery is not a matter of continuing as with other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	In every way when we do this work of our will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the greatest part of my masters and healthy men who performed circumcision around the thigh, with force, and at every new occasion;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if the course was altered because there were two tunics, and by chance it happened that one was cut above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Now the wound is covered, and the pain is double, and at the mundification which is in the thigh, it is not assured of the point of the limb;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and at the Mundification of the ankle by chance it happens that the vein is pierced, and they run the abscess, and many times they are born thus that they have no need of mundification and I wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification which is done with forces at all the thread of the wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut equally in all souls tension;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread should be well stretched around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him suffer more than to tie the thread around the penis so gently, and then you make it slide in all the ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then you make it stand straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand on the penis and blow or make a sign, and pull it up high so that the head of the penis is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then well-cleanse the ordure that is assembled there, then tie the sign with a double thread, then tie it underneath I push to another lien.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it as you ought to by the second ligature at the pouch and at the index finger, and copulate between the two ligatures, then lift the cord above hastily and pull the head of the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the remedy.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and on the powder I drizzle glue from a moth-eaten egg cooked at the same time as rose water, mixed with rose oil good and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat with another treatment as long as he is not healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the remedies for the purification is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two heads should be opposite and should be cutting, and should be the heads also as big as the equal measurement:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of mundification is when the heart within was opened at the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, thus that the liquids make an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and the equal alignment, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, so hold it with bandages, and then the cope.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it surpasses three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, so let it be until the abscessed place is appeased, and the crust scales lightly;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if you cover it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Heal then the wound of things suddenly wounded by powder, which we have said to treat with powders, and if you cover it beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm at all.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure the wounds, as we have said, until they are healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or congealed blood, or bubble, or new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine does not flow, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is there or in the neck of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent over their knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and they place their feet on the back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part of the back, and restrain the patient's arm as much as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the stone above, because of which the urine flows;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you administer an extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and be of subtle silver threads, like the feather of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let it be the length of a palm and a half, and be subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of releasing the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the head with a piece of wool or cotton, and push the head of the thread into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut the excess of the wool and push it just to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and wolf's cub's urine, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod of moist oil and olive oil and water TED;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod downwards towards the bowel;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then apply the syringe before reaching the bladder, and the patient feels it going up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because of that which conducts or guides it when it twists.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread throughout the little lane little by little, and the urine follows the lane, then it is straightened out, and makes the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And continue with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the vein
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or blood comes into the vein, where putridity is assembled, and you have seen distilled waters and medicines, if made on all the instrument called "clyster", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if there are three perforations:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the veins are sought by which the short medicine is such that it stops well the sensual movement without addition, if one can then draw out the moisture, and apply as needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medications in the bladder, place the head of the cauterizing iron in the moisture, and pull towards the drawing force that is within.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you draw the moisture to the cauterizing iron, and then strongly pull back the drawing force within.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture enters there, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and it is the subtle form of the syringe through which one injects the bladder.
si est ci:	if it is so.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or of copper, and it has a head that is higher.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below is the seat or the chain's end.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it that you want to inject into the bladder, then tie it between the two seats in the form of a double twisted thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then put the head of the cauterizing iron on the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture collected there, until the patient feels that the moisture has been drawn into the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly all around;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then put the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a buckle, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as if you had done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already said in the previous section the ways of piercing and the extraction of assembled medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and we have said the difference between the piercing for painful wounds, and all the signs, and in which piercing one should operate with skill;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the rod;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	And I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is generated in the bladder happens more often to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it appears suddenly, and scratches the patient's rod, and it bites many times, and then becomes swollen;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at most of these jumps the foundations;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and it is easy to heal children until they are 4 years old, and it is very grievous in the old, and it is like a weak moan, to those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and it is easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient through cleansing, in order to remove all the bad humors that are within the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders the healing of the wound.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift them up and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and jumps out many times from the top high;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the vessel is entirely sloping downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then the scalpel and touch within;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall to the toucher of the whole, then anoint your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is weak, or your middle finger, if the patient is young and accomplished;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and thrust it into its foundation, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then anoint the neck of the vessel;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press on with your finger, and thrust into the defect where you saw to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the minister to press the vessel with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand lift the skin which is beneath the loins in the part where the cutting is done.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then I apply the spatula-shaped instrument, because this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an incision between that which is between the groin and the perineum, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight on the stone, and the two should be thus or at the perineum, and the cut should traverse so that it is wide enough by default, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	perhaps the pressure if the two which are at the perineum, so that it may sense the labor;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is a piece of stone where it has angles and margins:
si est griés a issir;	if it is difficult to come out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is a piece that is underneath, similar to a pebble, and rounded, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Where there are angles and margins, make the cutting larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and it does not jump, so it is necessary that you stretch on the tendons which are like a thread at the head, in order to stretch the stone so it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	where you apply beneath the subtle, curved instrument at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot engineer it thus, so enlarge the small hole, and if the sense is deceived, so extract the glassy [substance];
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stone, so apply the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then extract forcefully, and the small ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it must be treated with caution, and made to cause less harm.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For these things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	where he dies, or the urine comes back through the tube that the veins cannot hold;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but however you exert yourself to treat, or to remove the bandages, so that you treat it by sections;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, then apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on top a dressing moistened with oil and wine, or with oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then restore the patient to their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage until just a day later.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, stir well the oil and water, then apply the ointment of diafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until he is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and there is congealment of blood in the bladder, and so it retains the urine, which is known in such a way that without a sound with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	put your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of wax, and aid it in all ways that you know, so that it may be healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the openings that you treat, that you tie the two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the treatment of what I say thus, that you cut often, is to excuse oneself from cutting by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already experienced this thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Here is the translation:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take the thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then push the iron into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the iron with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can break the stone from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If you come so soon to the urine, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone that is within the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	It is thus broken, and jumps out with the urine, and heals the patient;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this because of any thing that deflects it, then put the thread beneath the stone and another above, then make the penis in place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract it out, and release the ligament, and cleanse the congealed blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until he is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It rarely happens that a stone is in the genitals of women, and if it happens at all, the treatment is grievous, and is defended against by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well who uncovers herself as mirrors, especially when she is cast.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more profound than the stone of the man, because it requires making a deeper cut, and great fear there is. And if you need to ascend to this, then it is necessary that you take a wise woman knowing well, and touch the true vein on, and if you do not find it, nevertheless seek I cast a subtle mirror;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and it presents a wise woman in the life of women, where a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she does what you command her to do from the inquiry of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look well if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to push his finger or foundation and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if he finds it, if it presses beneath his finger, and he recommends that she pushes her finger or with the patient, and seeks and presses his left hand on the bladder strongly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the bladder down to beneath, until it comes to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then feel upon the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft flesh, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his finger upon the stone or beneath, and let it be cut at the first small size;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then put the razor in the incision, if you feel the stone if it grows into the wound as much as the stone can issue forth, and know that many kinds of stones are:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	it is to know, small and large and thick and thin, long and round, and those that have roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to recognize the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the saneness (health) fails, then apply to the liver a vitroil broth, and hold for an hour as long as the saneness is established;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is broken, and use the instruments that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone as men do for you to help in your operation;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the saneness (health) fails, and it is of the artery that is cut, then apply the powder to the liver and hold with tentes and bendelz, and do not recommence more than this, and leave the stone and do not handle it again, lest by chance the patient may die;
puis cure la plaie.	then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the spots are purified, then return to your work, so that the stone can come out forcibly.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Armice water is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white foam, which is beneath the skin of the loins, that contains the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac", and never is properly on the fabric of the eyelid, if one thinks that it is another eyelid;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it's the skin of the conjunctiva between the white "syfac" that we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and they do not have a small pouch.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is from the weakness that comes to the intestines, and it spreads out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never does it come from percussion on the conjunctiva, and this moisture if it has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	where it is declining in color to yellowish, or it is without red, or black, or whitish blue, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is or white "syfac" that we have mentioned, then it is the red abscesses, a little long as the figure of an eye, and does not open the conjunctiva, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then are the abscesses formed with part of the vein, and for this reason one thinks that it is another vein.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white sifac, then it feels very good;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you want to know the color of the moisture, it is tested at all the internal quartering, from which the form is thus presented.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the examination, judge from what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then he leans on his back, on something a little high, and places beneath him many towels;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then he sits on his left, and instructs the minister to sit on the right, and stretches out the rod to one of the two ribs of the heart of the joints;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the scalpel lightly, and cut the skin of the joints within the length of a hand up to the point where it pricks, and let your incision be entirely straight in dividing the skin of the joints up to the white spot, and carefully scrape off subtly as you can.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the white spot fully with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put in your anointed fingers, and the white spot is above.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	And do not touch the core of the joints, but only the white spot should be scraped.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Cut all or in pieces the membrane of it subtly, so that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg-shaped fluid flows out for a long time, then you will reset it in its place when you have accomplished the work of the white spot.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then assemble the two leaves of skin around the burn with a suture, then treat it like other wounds until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the ulcer corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cut around the entire suspension, and extract the ulcer, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the water is gathered in two assembled parts, know that these are two branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	Cut the other part similarly as you did the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a moistened oil rosate.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another moistened linen in wine and oil, and put on the two burns, and put doubled drapels above, and tie it with all the bandages that are according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take II drapels, and the applications of laine charpie according to this resemblance and are assembled by stitching in the girdle of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold on the foundation just up to the back, and the others at the part where they prick.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two heads on the II angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the buckle of the arm;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and no time is medicine this remedy of cautery in the length of iron, and it is that you take I cautery cultellary subtle, and burn the skin of the thighs, and be scorched as we have said, so that the white vein that contains the water is discovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that vein as onions, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And hold the scalp in all the ways you can, as much as you stretch it.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and beware that the flames do not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more sacred;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and beware of the deterioration of blood, and beware that the operations are timely;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you do the opposite, or abscess bursts or deterioration of blood or something else, if you cure what makes you do the opposite, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, if you promise perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs we have said that the aqueous humour is there, then make the patient sit on a high seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess in the part beneath all the spatula-like width, and put the perforation deep into the long body of the corpse;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the wounds be large, so that all the pus flows out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it flow out to discharge the remaining pus, then treat it until the wound is healthy;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow the pus to exit through the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one extracts the pus of hydropic people, so that its shape is thus presented;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the wound, and know that the pus returns, and it is assembled after six months or a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will spend their days thus.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the entrails
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease there is fear in many dispositions, because it seems to me that many are worth more than those left behind.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from bad humors;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to be known by the abundance of bitter and acidic humor, which is spread through bad humors, or from percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and there is no point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance it is a grievous abscess, greenish and piercing, and of a foul color, and sometimes it comes from a narrowing of the artery, or from an inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a narrowing of the artery, it is recognized by the disposition of the hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and do not touch him with your hand.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	He who is made of inflamed vein is known by his expression at the touch of the fingers, and one can well judge the condition from this resemblance, and on other flesh.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the cord of the veins, then the vein is above, and the flow falls from the white surface, and releases the suspension from all parts of the vein.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the vein is already familiar with these new flesh, then it is necessary that you extract the vein, and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is attached to the surface, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all of this tension, and cut around it circularly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the back of the hand, then it is necessary to cauterize all of it, and hold the finger steady, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are accomplished, then apply the plaster of softening oil and rose oil, and afterwards treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the entrails
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	These are enclosed abscesses wrapped in a wrapping resembling a bundle, with the softening of the veins, and the patient suffers greatly when it bursts.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this disease is very similar to the previous one, and in every way we will tell you about its work, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high seat, then bind him with suspensory cords at the two hips, to all the vessels which are close to the vertebrae, and tighten them firmly, and stretch them out strongly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut with a sharp spatula widely through the spot where the vessels are, until they are discovered, and then scrape away from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then fix a needle where it has a double thread, and tie it to the first vein where the vitellus is come, and then tie it again to the other vein;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then they apply the cupping glass directly, according to the length of the body, and in drawing out the corrupted humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heal the wound as with others or by applying a poultice, so that no vessel bursts which would nourish one of the intestines;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for through this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, it is necessary to extract the intestines from all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry out, and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	about the treatment of swelling
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The symptoms of this disorder are through the section that comes or goes out, or the extension onto the belly in the area of the intestines, because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the intestines;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is either from the softness of the intestine, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from lifting of a heavy weight, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is about the extension of the muscle, if it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and they are equal abscesses right up to the peritoneum, because the muscle presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the intestine, which causes sudden severe pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin nearby, and this is due to the issue with the intestine and the body's weakness against the swelling of the intestine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments of fear, because they think they will escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the surgery is that you instruct the patient to insert their intestine with their hand inside the wound, if they can reinsert it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then let him be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the heart upwards, and cover all the skin of the thighs from the length.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the liver of the waist uncines according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the dead skin which is under the skin of the joints, so that the white skin underneath becomes uncovered on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then put your finger index in the one that follows the joint, in the one that is between the white skin which is under the skin of the vein, and between the second skin, and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second skin;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move the vein to the right hand within the circle of the joints, and stretch the white skin upwards with your left hand, and lift the vein against all the skin towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to stretch the vein upwards, and separate what is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and seek with your fingers if there is a point of the intestine enveloped or hard white skin, and if you do not find anything, put it to the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	Then take a needle with a large thread made of X threads, and insert it into the rear part of the skin, which is after the skin of the kidneys.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, so that there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the skin with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, lest an abscess forms there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the thread there again according to the first thread, as long as two fingers from that one, and after these two threads leave the skin which is under the skin of the kidneys the width of a finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the thighs, as far as the sinew and the bowel, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then mix the millstone in oil, and put it on wounds, and I will mix the lien that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the white finger cauterized which we have said, after the incision, due to fear of deterioration of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens often, and let the lien stay until it dries by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in drying, so be aroused with warm water, and put on what we have said, until it dries;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done as with the twig that grows together with the vein, in such a way that you bind the vessels, after cutting lightly underneath.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	Then cauterize in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who are swollen, so that the veins heal.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, so that it becomes healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No time is spent on rough remedies, as we have said, and open the abscesses.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not descend into the intestines with caustics, and if they descend, it is little, and repair all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always, if it stays too long in this point, the wound or syrup believes, so that the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the syrup which is in the abscesses, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflates the abscesses and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously said.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and it is never cured by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then take the limb of the affected joint in a straight line according to the quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the skin that is beneath the skin which is swollen, then take the razor and place it on the apparent limb beneath the skin;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two apparent limbs beneath the skin on the head of the razor, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the razor, and do not touch the skin in any way that would stretch one finger to another, as I have made you aware of in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then heal by the healing of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the fibers, if it is disfigured and cures the wound, so that it may be healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The surface is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are muted in this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times are softened the skins of the joints in some men, because the flesh that is within is softened, and it is easy to see;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, that one makes the patient sit up straight and covers the skin which is softened on the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring together the two lips of a wound, and if you see, first remove the excess of softened skin at three stitches or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cover between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healthy, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	of punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that cauteries are condemned in our law, and therefore I please that I do not speak of them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary to use them for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one of which is that the masters know how to respond when one asks them, and about the cure;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often have need of cautery on certain beasts to aid us, such as goat and sheep and cattle and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that cauteries are made according to two manners:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by attraction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we make by attraction, let us sit in warm water, as long as the joint becomes softened and relaxed;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them with your hand, until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the cautery of incision:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you hold the best, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the suspensor, and cover each hole with a cup, when you have well scarified them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and let no pus accumulate under the skin and the subtle skin that is above the veins;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of cautery is more deadly than that which is made by attraction, because in attraction sometimes something of the joints remains, which prevents the joint from being luxated;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	Here is the translation:
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One is when between the two testicles appears as if it were the figure of a woman's nature, where it has hair, and sometimes the urine flows in a short distance.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another manner is in women, and it has on the little finger as a rod and they bind.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the man and woman is that you treat the adjacent flesh entirely, and you heal as for other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second way, of men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tentiginous (Note: Tentiginous likely means "inflamed" or "swollen", but I'll keep it as close to the original as possible)
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A tumor is an adjacent flesh on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to behold;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you remove the excess of the tumor with your hand or with onions, and treat it lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deeply into the fontanelle, because the running of blood will not come, then the treatment of another treatment until it is healthy;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and at another time it rises to the mouth of the marrow, and the impediment, and by chance it bursts forth, and is according to the resemblance of a cowe, and for this they called it in ancient times "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	It is necessary to cauterize it, just as we have said for the tetanus, and to treat it until it is healthy.
de erratique	of the erratic (Note: Erratique likely means "irregular" or "wayward", but I'll keep it as close to the original as possible)
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Error occurs when the nature of the woman is not fully perceived, or the passage is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural from birth, or happens by accident through disease that comes to it;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is from a stuck cartilage, or subtle and thick dou syfac, and it is made in the fontanelle of the marrow, or in the ribs, or below, or whatever;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and difficulty conceiving, and infertility, and by chance having flowers to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this thing is by the observation of the pill.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears close, seek it in your fingers or in the vein.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a subtle and dou syfac, and it is near the two lobes, if you hurry, and turn them thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then extend the two lobes formally, so that the subtle dou syfac is round, and is above the protuberances;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take a linen cloth, and anoint it with oil, and place it on the loins, and guide the woman to her husband every day, so that she cannot become pregnant.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the wound is hard and thick, it is necessary to wash the scalpel with a similar leaf of mint.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the protuberances are of flesh born, then suspend them from the ninth rib and the cope;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and these bloody medicines are stagnating blood, if as an antidote, blood of dragon, incense, together with abundant dew;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then apply a wide poultice of soft cloth, so that the wound cannot suppurate;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and let it be for a long time, and apply a tent of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then be cured by other treatments until he is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh wounds become gangrenous, then they need to be covered according to this manner, so that they do not turn into abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the abscess that is gangrenous in the flesh, one should not touch it with iron.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are varices of veins that without sharp custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have already said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will tell you here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the veins, when they are deeply embedded in the flesh, and they do not appear to sensation, if it is not the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the flesh, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then stop the flow as with tourniquets, and bind around its roots, then powder with medicines that restrain blood, such as açaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then soak her feet in warm water for an hour, then put them in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if blood flows out, then make him sit in a decoction of sumac and crust of pomegranate seeds and of gale and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stagnates, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If that does not work, make him apply warm poultices to the back and to the affected limbs without piercing;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take wool, and soak it in juice of plantain or in juice of angelica with old wine, and apply warm to the location.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess breaks, then clean the location of the swelling as much as it is healthy;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough head, then it should be covered as I have said before;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then heal him so that he may be healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses come in the marrow, such as cancer and piercing abscesses and herpes and isthmuses and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary therefore that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of iron, look if the abscesses are gathered at the beginning of their coming, and full of bitterness and fever, and if it becomes red then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make me soften until the pain is appeased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient sit on a seat, and have small seats or where he leans back, and support himself on his back and gather his feet together in order to deflect the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his hips be expanded, and put his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good ligament;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then suck the bulb towards the right side, and I will handle the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the form.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you have handled this instrument, you fix the rule first to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and it does not harm the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instruments are too large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapels, so that the instruments do not harm them.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he place the horn of the instrument above, and that he hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses open, and one feels them with the hand, it is necessary to cover at the head, with a spatula-like instrument.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the wound is empty, it is necessary that you put in the place tender mosses in oil rose, or in dry green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and apply the tender flesh to the bottom of the wound, and put beneath the marrow and beneath the prickly vein clean moss in water or soft mallow being applied;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the treatment after two days of anointing comes to that, so that it be healthy;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and often lift up the marrow and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and aristology being applied for a long time;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the anointing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is returned to the marrow, it is necessary that you beware of iron rust, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary to be first at the childbirth that it knows the natural shape of the infant, and the signs are when you see the woman approaching from below, and desires to give birth to the arm;
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then hasten the edges of the iron to issue;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then consider that these instruments are according to natural figure, and it is the issue under its head, and the second one with it;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, then you should press his belly lightly, so that the edges issue quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends upon its head, then is the second one with it, and the marrow of its superfluities is purified by good mundification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes against the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or swelling, and is converted by accident over its neck, and by other bad figures;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	it is necessary for the practitioner to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as to how one must aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the infant comes onto its head by natural means, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the child is weak, then make it sit on a cushion, or the women hold it;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and raise its natural oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the bath between its two small spatula-like fingers where it is formed:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and anoint the umbilical cord, and cut to his nail as much as the moisture that is in there flows out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the woman's belly as much as the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to clysterize the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and oil of sesame;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her take and be comforted by condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if the infant is now astral.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands are swollen, then it is necessary to reset them lightly little by little.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and lift her feet high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then remove the seat from the ground, and hold the woman, so she does not fall at the removal.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant is dead, then grasp the hands at the cot which is placed before, and extract the child, and reset equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, it is necessary to push high up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is equalized;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps just to the hips, then instruct to take hold, and make it stretch with good condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If the wound is deep, then God wants.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not straighten as we have said, if it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not heal as we have said, take a poultice of high quality, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in the mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put it on the woman's nature within and drive out this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until beneath the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is softened underneath, make her a girdle of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a seat, then make her stretch out and hold her mouth and nose, and take her belly lightly, for the infant is coming out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes out in this form, then I put the fontanel of its hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then let it be sewn onto its neck, and the feet depend below, and let it be leaning on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold its hands a little at a time, and then place its hands on the belly, and remove the cushions from below, until it is arranged below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if it does not sit well, take its feet and shape them comfortably, then shape the belly above, then you will place your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and rock the child a little at a time;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to take hold of it until the child is seated.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes holding a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it is necessary to skillfully bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then lift the woman, and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her sit on the bed, and shape her legs comfortably.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the poultice that I have prepared;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not take, let it sit on the seat, then study to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and look at the child according to its natural shape, and let it stretch out, and instruct it to take hold as much as the veins can be forced.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the birth of the child on his neck, and has spread out his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I think that the vein should take its hand, then turn it little by little, and look at it lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, put on the natural poultice of altée and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, let it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold;
et la fai esternuer.	and let it stretch out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the following
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to be in this manner entirely the second time, cut the second time at your finger, as much as the moisture is evacuated;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and he presses his face against his neck, if the cup of the womb, so it is not retained, and kills the infant;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then throw the child inside, as long as you have placed it so it fits, and instruct the woman that she should not take it out at any time:
adonques si istra legierement.	then it will be easier to deliver.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the dislocation of the twins (likely referring to a joint or a pair of bones)
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and it is not a strange thing, and it happens little.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they have little name;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that, for they are multiplied, and are divided by the syphac who separates them, which is tied to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they issue forth naturally as a single one, just like we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it is grievous, so the treatment as we have said, and let the subtle baths, and make everything easy and light that it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as it will bring health to him.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	None are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and all are formed in the form of an infant by the measurement of the glorious wisdom, and it is necessary that the baths know everything, for it seems that similar things have happened;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman with a dead or stillborn child, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to perform manual extraction;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and there is no accident or she has fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be bent over her back, and her hands be inclined downwards, and the legs be raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife holds the two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart during the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with oils made from leaves of wild tansy and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and musk;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then gently lay them in the mother's lap, then she wants the place where she laid the swaddling clothes to be comfortable for her, and take care that the infant is well wrapped so it descends onto its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if you fasten the swaddling clothes in her eyes or on her neck or in her mouth or in her palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs, and if the descent is onto the feet, hold it or prick it and touch the moistened sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and hold his whole hand lightly, and fix the onion in none of these places that we have said, until it reaches the desired spot.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and it is the shape of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then fix an encounter with another onion, or the third where you have your mastery, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are evenly stretched by moving one way and another, to make them issue forth, and let the onions be held firm, as is their shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, anoint the vein with some of its oil, and apply it to that part, and pull out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there remains none, put this onion or higher up, and do it until everything issues forth completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be reduced by stretching, then it is necessary that you envelop it with a bandage, so long as it becomes straight.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then put a bandage on the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and so for the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the infant is large and it is twisted in its exit, or if it has an aching assembled head, then it is necessary that you put the spinal instrument between your two, and make the head straight and extract the ach.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you will use the instrument called "almidach", which is made with the instruments or chapter that follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus the same make the infants have a naturally straight head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then treat the bones with tongs, and if the head jumps out and holds on to the malleolus, so be careful, as much as the moisture that is or worse issues;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut into pieces at the joint where you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then it is necessary that you puncture as much as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the inflammation is on its feet, then it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the morrow are lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stretched in the belly or in the thigh, then it is necessary that you extract it with the drapil enveloped on the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and open the belly or the thigh, as much as the moisture that flows from it;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other members are numbed, and the head remains, then put the scalpel in the palm of your hand at the front of the marrow, and treat it just up to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	Then apply the ninth or tenth treatment, and burn the excess flesh.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by hot abscess that has come, if it does not need to be operated on, then it needs to be treated with moist and fatty things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and treat the ulcers, and apply ointments that are mild, softening, and moisturizing.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can place it evenly, then treat it as we have said regarding the living infant.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and do not have any power, if you burn the flesh in pieces, and leave nothing of the secondary (layer).
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, treat them as we have said regarding hot abscesses that come into the marrow.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if a flow of blood comes out, then apply astringent ointments, and treat with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly an infant had been dead, then she conceived another on top of that, and the other was stillborn.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, there came abscesses in his stomach, and they grew so much that they burst open, and he began to have great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed on it a strong plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel greatly, because this wind has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I examined the wound and treated it with my hands, as much as the woman was at a better point;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I watched the woman for a long time afterwards, and it immediately improved a little bit around the joint;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I did not record this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the hammer to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Hereafter comes the method of pressing, where one finds the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and it is given to two attendants as it is given to the heads of the veins.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the tube be of a large size, and the margin of the trees as it should be, and of one palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the two veins let there be adjustments of this same tube, which are closed at one and the other, by half a palm in length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and this adjustment is pushed into the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, in its more subtle and lighter resemblance, is made from ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tenons.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two heads two adjustments, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you want to open the marrow with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet hanging and legs covered, then push the two adjustments adjusted together into the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then operate your hand on the entire instrument, as you have done with the tenons equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the marrow, until the handle does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied for their similar appearances;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the eyes have them aligned, so much more swift is the work, and higher are the homes for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared to, for their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second one is retained in infancy, then you must command the patient to retain his wing, and then make him stretch out with confidence, and hold your hands at the mouth and nostrils;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if he jumps through that, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If he does not, take the pot, and make a poultice or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the morrow, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia lignea, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or some of them, being cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a cane or tube down into the mouth of the patient, and the other end in the hole, and pull it tight so that the vapors come out from inside the patient.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make it straighten, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary humor is hastening.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not heal, instruct the patient to apply their left hand in oil of sesame or in a poultice of altaia, and then put it in a warm place, and seek the secondary remedy.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when they have found it, take it and stretch it little by little directly, so that the patient does not feel pain at the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but you must move it lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw it out.
si venra et se desaerdra.	if it comes and becomes disordered.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the patient is constricted, we have said the treatment to straighten, and of fumigation with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and let it not be of all this that we have said, if you guard against falling into error;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it happens that what is at the mouth of the mare, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then you anoint it with ointment of four drugs;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if it will putrefy and decay, and will come to a crisis;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but always, when it putrefies thus, there comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	It is necessary then to make fumigations suitable for that:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with fresh watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to see something similar to a dog, and put the subtle head in nature, and the wide shoulders over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let there be fumigations on the coals, and the tar until it is consumed, and recommence another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus the subtle ones are stifled.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	it is necessary therefore to handle the one who perceives with his finger, and does not perceive it at all from the spatula's agitation, and beware of touching it with the ligature.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on the affected limb a mixture of wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that he will not recover, then put or insert a tube of lead, and leave it there for a long time, and be careful when the veins want to burst in chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And often these stiflings come from a sudden wound or abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	it is necessary to cover that suddenly.
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	let it be cured, as we have said about the treatment of a piercing wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the bottom
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodation, and larger than those that come from beneath the foundation in default, or in the space of two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that swelling is old, it is operated on, and beneath the moisture a white or subtle boil appears, and sometimes these fistulae persist;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known by the fact that there is either indigestion or windiness when the patient makes evacuation, and sometimes by chance it jumps into the verse.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the rod;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And then one recognizes the persistent fistula at the foundation, and it does not go away.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horse hair, until you feel the probe or the hair at your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from excessive perspiration or wind, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not penetrate well;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is close to the bladder or close to the urinary tract, then the urine jumps, and cannot be soothed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	It is perceived just up to the joint of the thigh, if it is the tendon coming just to the loins;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, it is that it is still swollen, and no medicine nor sudden relief by anointing;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except through labor, and the foolish doctors who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In those that are not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patients place themselves in your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he raises his legs up to his knees, and has his knees bent towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put a straightening tent, or a splint if there is twistedness, until you know where the tent goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it at the bottom, then you should put your right index finger, and then it seems that the tent has penetrated;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and be discovered where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is pierced;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if you do not work carefully, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can almost always heal some, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that one makes, if it is that one heats the subtle cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and burn all around the fistula, until it reaches the bottom.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these burnt crusts are raised, which resemble a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat the many soft ulcers with a poultice, until those crusts are removed, then treat with ointment, softening and soothing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, nothing else can be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger which is at the bottom, and place between your finger and the holder a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering of the vein.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and burn immediately before the holder, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the holder.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and it will be delivered the tent, and fall;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then reject those withered branches that seem a bird's wing, and none of them remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound is swollen, and it forms a crust between the skin and the vein, then cauterize with fire or medicine water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery assembles two bone things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	it is to know, the dryness of those assembled branches, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of muddled tents in mud or in broken choz, until the joints throw forth, and it makes the withered branches dry in the mud;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the fingers suddenly grown into hard skin, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the edge of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then you should apply your finger or foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between two is the cloth or the syfac or branches, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you apply cautery as we have said, or you cut just to the flesh, or if you can place and treat it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep in the wound, lest you cut the tendon that holds the foundation, and bring on the evil discharges by the opposite sensation.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be healthy, or you separate that covering and the wound then as it is cut from the foundation, either by tension or by another pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then define that empty space which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is deficient in the foundation;
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And often fistulas occur according to this method:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you apply the tent to the fistula, and it is where the foundation of the lesion touches the skin above, if you take a precise tent according to this form at the head:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you push a twisted thread into it, and push the tent onto all the threads in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is penetrating into the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that which is pierced, so that you apply your finger or foundation:
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the two edges together, and hold one to the other, and let it be for a day or two:
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it many times, until the threads grasp those flesh that are between them, and cicatrize;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound until it is sewn and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper setting in the depth, and then the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinal spine where the fistula is made is very sharp and pointed, partly and cutting;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because one should not grasp what one should not grasp, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of the bruises
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Emorrhoids are according to two manners:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	where they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and suddenly blood bursts out, and there is one or many, and they destroy the foundation and at the base of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are deep down have little moisture, and suddenly burst out with a little citrine water or a little blood, and have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go to the latrine, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and hold it like a tendril, or you hold it on your fingernail, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the uncle cannot hold them due to their moisture, take them with a drapil, or a cushion, or a piece of camlet;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and hold them with your fingers, then burn them, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the fire of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize as it is said or chapter of cautery, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot issue, then cleanse the patient with a harsh and bitter cluster of medications to purify what is in the foundation, so that they can issue freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patients can take it, and if the thread is outside the foundation, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them with your nail or tongs, and burn them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you adjust the bandage in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make a perforation through the needle from another side, and twist the two ends of the thread beneath the needle, and if it is of equal length.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do likewise for all the others, and leave it there to correct the excessive flow of blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the dressing a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerote, and put it on the base, and instruct the patient that he should rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it be until they scar, and when they will be fallen, if you treat with ointment and other treatments, until he is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the dryness of the veins or base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Here is the translation:
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	You should reach the point of a spatula or of your nail above the scab, which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal them as soon as they are numb so that it suits them;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if he cannot be numbed, then recommence the rubbing stronger than before, so that it heals much, and is scarred;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal them as soon as they are healthy.
dou fremit	you apply heat
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formice is a small faulty appearance under the skin, and goes much deeper inside;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the frost, and one feels it just like death from shivering, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a thread of a bird's feather, or a strong feather of a vulture, and put that thread on the shivering, so that the circles encircle the shivering entirely around;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all around the thread so that you grasp everything around the shivering, and put it deep inside, and eradicate the shivering from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a cane of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	I do not perceive, for I must hold still, and I must press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if you cauterize the fremittance, as it is before or in front of the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of tin foil or mail;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and never make those small and large instruments, according to those for which they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These therefore that one uses in the treatment of children who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large cluster is above large, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and there should be a separation or the intestines are tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and have on one of the sides two perforations, and on the other one;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and let the intestines or womb into which one puts medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be perceived all around with small perforations, and have between each perforation one thread of space, then put in these perforations one strong thread twisted in X or however you twist, and assemble the belly as if it were a bag;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, if you hold the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cauterize;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and it's the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cautery with oil or egg white, or similar thing, then apply it lightly;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the minister should hold it with his two hands together, so that it is all visible, then remove the cautery, and lift the patient's legs to the bench, and if the medicine wants to exit, hold on as much as he can;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a night completely, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clusterize him in illness of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to issue, then recommend it as much as he be healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or an abscess, then let the cautery be as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it's the subtle form of the cluster that holds the skin steady on the spot where the skin is held.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and of medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations or places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword and of knife, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or which are made according to the laws of the body, as wounds that fall on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care whether it's from a blow of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is large, and you suspect a hot abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If you make the head wound better by ceasing the bleeding from the injury, and let the healing be on the opposite side of the naval area;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and spare the patient from fullness of wine and coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to recover, let his meat be diminished, and drink no wine, nor eat any flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, suppurating matter that comes out, cotton soaked in rose oil remedy, or in wine steeped.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no suppurating matter, put on the wound, so it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little about later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound has been moved, put on some ointments, until it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by stretching, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is discovered on the bone, and it is open, and does not hold but to a little, then it collapses.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin over the leather-like skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, as if they are eating stale and roasted meat, also like poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find skin putridity, and it does not adhere to the bone, then collapse the entire putridity, and throw it away, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without a crust, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, then seek to extract the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you apply this powder which sucks up likewise that the arsenic has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	take incense in part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	blood of dragon, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	living talc, three parts, and powder subtly, and fill the wound, and hold firmly, until it dries well and joins to all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and let it be without loosening, so it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not the encense nor the blood of dragon, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arsenic has moved to the wound, meanwhile in this state, if you do not put this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it discharges well;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of other treatments until he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then hold it with subtle pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the fractures of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, then there is no other technique than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the nerve substance is cold, and its connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the soothing medicine be, such as warming water in sweet water, and mixing it with rose oil, and cooking it thus in sweet water, and other types of minerals according to this manner, and applying moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with bands, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then prick below or lower down;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and as blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for this is a surgical task;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the ribs, and the conduits are guarded, because the flesh goes, then sew up the rib on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it firmly, and leave it for some days, then cure the wounds of ulcers as long as it becomes healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then excavate it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, then remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound purifies, and be careful and alleviate the discharge;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then the treatment should be as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from a wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a blow of a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if the wound has formed ventosity where the patient's ailment lies:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not penetrate deeply, and it will revive the heart, and kill the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I put on an attractive poultice, and apply it to him twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have a poultice, then put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	If there comes no spasm, neither bad trembling of the heart nor strange movements of the arm;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the then with applications and other treatments, until it be sound;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and becomes an open sore, then know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment is as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, of stitching;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then cauterize the wound, and treat the festering sores if they are swollen;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not swollen, let the wound suppurate, if he alleviates the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds in other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Here is the translation:
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and mild and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the ends of the intestines, because of the intromission of them;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one, because one puts the intestines back in place more easily, if one does not put them back in a hurry;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestine swells so much that it feels cold, if it returns more to its place, and therefore it is better to have a smaller wound, because one can reset the intestine to its place better than the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common stitches have to do with the stitch of the belly, and the stitch of other wounds of the body and the two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and however they are more proper with the stitch of the belly, and I will describe each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and a thing is to be put back, it is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is frozen, warm it up in such a way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in hot water only, or you cook in hot water squinancy and cypress and spike, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and often make these veins retract, and it is more likely to withdraw from swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling disappear, if you soften the intestine with water or oil and may be cooked, because by this the entry is alleviated to some extent;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument where one gathers the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is more likely to be cutting, that we should not cut without great necessity there being;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments for making an incision:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut deeply into the curve and do not dig further, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, you can then have power over it, for that is worth much.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient sit on his back, and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower abdominal part, place the head and the thigh higher than the lower parts, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, adjust accordingly so that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to manage what I say in large wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, use what is at hand, then hold it between your hands, I minister carefully so that you tighten the entire rupture with your hand, and bring the lips together.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and it is the common method of sutures, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound a space of two fingers, and fix a needle or have a strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two heads of skin with the two heads of the suture, which is beneath the skin inside, until you make them pierce that part, and bring together the two heads of the suture in four ways.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then strain with a double thread around the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound together, and then leave the finger of space, and fix another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then weave two threads as you did with the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to what you have mastery of needles, until the entire wound is restrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse, for subtle needles grasp all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For it is necessary that they be moderate.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	And do not push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin, lest they grasp and open the wound before the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	And then grasp the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or drapery around the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this manner of treating with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it suffices to use a needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second treatment is common, and it is that you assemble the two heads of leather and the two heads of silk together onto a needle or where there is one strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these heads all four together, then reset the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that one sews the drapes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitch the width of a smaller thumb;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	this stitch suits the man, and I sewed a wound that one of our men had in his belly, which was wounded by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm in length, and it was two palms deep into the intestines, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine then when it had been dead for 24 hours, and the wound was sutured until the 15th day, and I cured him, and he was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not care for his condition, because I stood in the place where one found none, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and applied sense upon the wound cotton very often twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and sew up the part that is deficient just to the inner skin;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if you have sewn up with suture or stitched or you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce another part of the inner skin just to the deficient part;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the intention of this stitching is that you sew thus as the pelletier makes pellets, and that you leave once the thread of one part, and take it up again from another, until the stitching is entirely complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way of stitching, which Galen described properly, is like some fountains that assemble the two parts naturally, and apply one head of the wound to the other head, in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Stick a needle or the head of a mirror-like probe, and make it pierce that place thoroughly, and let the two heads of the wound;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the defective part just up to that depth within, as the two heads of the wound;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce one and the other from the defective part just up to that depth within, in the two other heads of the mirror-like probe that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And it is the worst way of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen said this in his speech, and no one bears witness to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, or have a thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and it is known that when the rupture is within the belly, the stitching is more grievous than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of the other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the fresh wound all its blood, likewise that the artery has moved, then reset the intestine, and the sewn area;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on the powder of burnt crust, and if the artery has moved, then put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the thread, and sew up the skin flap, and the membrane;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with the others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you do not have medicine, put it on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, cotton much, and remove it twice a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not have mastery of other medicines in many circumstances when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will not make a bad community with the principal members, then it is necessary that you moisten a light linen cloth in oil of tempered heat, or in rose oil, and put it on the anguish, and beneath the spines;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it feels pain or bloating in the belly, and many times it happens, then they cleanse with red wine enema, and meanwhile the bloating reaches just up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce deeply, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the kidneys.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if he jumps from the wound, set it back as soon as the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and turns towards black, set that you lay the black place, which removes blood that does not come to life, for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the ligament, and place the two heads hanging from the part beneath the wound until it befalls to alleviate the extraction when the wounds heal, and the wounds close.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of a broken bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some homes, because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by a spear in the belly.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right of the stomach, and it became swollen and turned into a fistula, and thus obstructed the digestion and the ventilation;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I examined him for a cure according to what I could, and did not cease from subtling until he was healthy, and his eyes cleared.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him clearing, I doubted that the patient had a bad humor in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no badness, but he remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take firm threads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it draws its mouth shut;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then he covers the head, and this holds so that it cannot dislodge, then put another thread afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and cut open the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the intestine becomes stuck together, and brings no harm to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this intestine thread that is very cleaned, and then tie it to the head of this subtle twisted thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it into place;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching is not stronger than according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, if there is no cleverness to heal it, except with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it swells, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it is swollen and bursts open.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of a hard and white scar, where one does not feel pain, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear broth, and other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	and sometimes little, and other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have already spoken about the division of wounds, that every wound that is not clean, and there is no flesh, it is only caused by one of the 8 causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, through the small passage of blood or flux;
ou por sa malice;	or through its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or where there is too much broth;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a kind of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is slow to digest, and slow to heal, and is naturally inclined to putrefy;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in this section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar limbs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that does not come near the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to recognize it, take a thin thread of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, seek its end;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle thread of probe, because the probes bend towards the twisting;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot explore it well by probes, then cleanse it through one of the perforations, because the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it becomes clear;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then you should examine it with your power, so that you recognize if there is a bone or nerve, and it is separated in the front, and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the rotten flesh and the corrupt humors that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	And then the treatment so that it may be healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, it is necessary that you cut deeply, as much as you can, then I put tinctures of soft medicine, and the poultices just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluousness that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then I put ointments in a healthy and clear manner, so that it may be completely healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if it is not healed by this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not bother you in the principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it as much as the corruption is entirely removed, then heal with things in a healthy and clear manner so that it may be completely healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healthy, and returns to its natural state as before, know that you have not been misled until now.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it uncovers and seeks as much as you are at the bottom, and removes all the corruption, then restores the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to an end;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tourniquets, if it is extracted with the suitable instrument for that, and if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave a single one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if you cut and moisturize and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot dislodge them at one hour, then put on the wound a poultice which promotes suppuration, and let it be until the abscess is formed between the bones, and then they will have less difficulty in their bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or shin, then raise the corrupted area until the decay is completely removed, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the decayed core, and it reaches close to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if you need to scrape and cut all the way to the corrupted area, and then treat it until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of a fistula that befell a man on his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the matter came to the leg, and he was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no way to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the surgeon looks through their foolishness to work so much on the abscesses that open, and they corrupt many materials, and become fistulous, and they come from many passages that all git into the body and moisture of the course;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many surgeons made a cure within two years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, so much that I was called to it, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was cured, and what corrupted through the passages of the large body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man became red, and had a citrine color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I thrust a probe into one of these holes, and then felt all around the holes, and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hastened then, and cut into one of the passages so much that I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I suspected that it was the corrupted bone that appeared to me, and I thought that there would be no other corruption, except for that which I had seen.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and begin to restore the wound with medicines soothing by long tension, and cannot suppress;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began again, and discovered the bone as before, and found continued corruption in the bone, and the swelling, and then I staunched it, and thought to suppress the blood flow;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not do so much that I touched upon a part of the bone, and I treated it thoroughly to its entire mass, then I restored it with medicines;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was quickly healed and suppressed at once, and did not need to start the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because the bloody evacuations often happen, but it was entirely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone of the joint, and it was in good disposition and had no harm or hindrance at all, neither to the wing nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take the splint, and hold it at the top of the broken bone, and instruct him to stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another bandage on the larger one of the two, and bind it on the flesh that is above the bone, and hold the head, so that you treat the corrupted flesh below, and uncover the flesh on the joint where you see swelling, lest the swelling spread to the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a splint or a pad below the bone to cover the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to sew thus that one can see and feel the corruption, and sew again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put a splint below, and then sew from one part to the other the corrupted area, and let the sewing be as long as the corruption, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut into the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone or where it connects to the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other remedy than to amputate twice;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or in a finger of the foot, then it is very difficult that thing, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire into that corrosion, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and apply a dressing in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not cause opposition to you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incision and the seams for cutting into these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the outlets, and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar tool for the operation;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument that you will need according to what is necessary for it.
dou feu	for fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The heads protrude either because of internal swelling or because of external blows;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicated that corrosion with the treatment of medicines, and it does not benefit, if it is necessary to amputate that limb up to where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes by means of death, or by the malice, which is a greater fault, of the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads, since this corrosion of limb to limb goes, and takes over the whole body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hasten to couple, and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, if it couples, and do not give it space to come just up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just up to the hand, if it couples at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach just up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, if it couples at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and thus always do when the corrosion comes to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, then it couples after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then it couples all the foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, then cut at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, then there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the way to cut or saw off the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister down from the upper ligament, and another minister up from the lower ligament, and you sever the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cut or saw, and place a piece of linen on each part, so that the saw does not touch the healthy flesh, and beware lest the patient suffers another wound and abscess therein.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the flesh hastily, or apply some restraining powders.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine as long as it is accomplished, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and heal until it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will count on it having at home in its own time:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he had a blackness that seemed to burn with fire, and that corrosion came first in his toe of foot, so much that it took over the whole foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to amputate the foot, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after that the corrosion returned to his hand, and it came to me, and I applied things rebounding after the purification of the body, but could not stop the corroding;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he saw that I was going to amputate his hand, and I did not want it, because I had hope of recovering the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubt that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and stopped trying to cure his hand, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I did not count it a failure because of this, that one does another task, if one has mastery.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never does an abscess come to the flesh of the nut, and it stays for so long that it makes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they break and burst, and the pus jumps out, and the veins are empty, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is as subtle as I describe, and it does not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so enlarged that it comes almost to the eye in the hollow, then it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is so that you should cut it all around, and likewise when it is subtle, just like a thin cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not hesitate because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface, and the skin is thick with flesh, then you should clean it with aclyster thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the wounds are large, and the discharge that comes from them is of foul odor, then you should clysterize with Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take iris root and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take of this according to need, and make it into aqua and honey, and in cleansing the wound, and hold the perforations;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay for two hours, then strain it by pressing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the wound is made whole, and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and no more is cleansing with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of vines, and pour water on top, then strain, and cleanse, until you know that the wound is well healed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot suffer it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse with water and honey, or where there is a little bit of litargire crushed;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	where you clarify with honey and mixed wine, that the honey has the property of softening and cleansing, and the wine makes the wound dry.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wound is well cleansed, then clarify what makes flesh grow in it, and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you clarify with certain medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned in the treatment of ointments.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the wound of the breast is small, and the cannula of the clarifier cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with an iron instrument, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or royal basilicon ointment, until it be enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave it so slightly open that the clarifier can enter, and if the wound that spills below is above, then cover or lower it to where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowel is in the front, if you do not let it grow in.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the belly below as you see, it appears in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place that it is, for when the bowel is in front, if you do not let it grow in. and if you cannot cover the belly below as you see, it appears in such a way:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bowel runs lightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and extend under the drapeuil of linen that covers the whole wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover the forces in the right place of the deep wound as much larger than at first, then extend a soft ointment under the other drapeuil according to the quantity of the deep wound, and put it on the deep wound of the belly to alleviate the bowel, and do not remove the large drapeuil until after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is on the tender part of the breast, often suffers from opening the belly, and knows that it corrodes from the belly, whether it's venom or a little or enough, or digests, or doesn't digest;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take heed that the patient feels pain or not, and if there's an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in this manner and you see the nature that jumps upon the tender part of the healthy, if it knows that the breasts are affected already, and approach the health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you open the wound, if you change into another dressing, and renew the binding.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the veins are agitated by indigestion after many days, know that the veins have not been opened.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if you come subtly to a long stretch afterwards, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men who delay in their wounds, and of those that do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the belly does not digest well after several days, it knows that the breasts are not affected;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the senses are slow to recover, and it is delayed, then apply medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as we have often applied diafinit, because there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take Diafinit ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the aroma of old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then prepare the confection and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same mixture makes honey cakes thickened, when Diafinit ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then I apply the plaster, and stick it to the breast, and many times I administer to a learned doctor, and celestial roots, which are also like flour of vieves and centory;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in use of simples or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make into powder, and put on the honey that I said, and in use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption is deep-seated, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that grows under the nail of the thumb or hand, or by chance grows in other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is neglected, and one does not take care of it, then the abscess comes quickly, and corrodes and gnaws away so much that it corrodes the root of the nail, and by chance it corrodes everything;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come the ulcers up to the bone, as far as it comes to painful swelling, and is the head of two large fingers, and is the skin's dark color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you remove all the superfluity which remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses on the flesh, and it begins to swell, and becomes white, then you must put the razor underneath the nail so it doesn't press on the flesh, and raise it high, and cut the subtle and delicate flesh subtly and lightly, and apply the remaining medicines burning and corrosive to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wounds as far as they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut around it, and remove the decayed part, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the finger decay, if you cut into it as we said before, then cure it until it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is swollen, and bruised, and it feels great pain, if it is necessary that you heal it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the finger at a spot near the joint, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the flesh beneath the finger, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that overcomes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two adjacent fingers that grow into the hands of some men by chance are all cartilaginous, and by chance they have a part or they have bones, and sometimes they have a nail, and none of them grow from the root of the joint, where the growth is in no way from the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born without a nail on the finger does not move, and he who is born with a joint in the finger, perhaps moves.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the cutting of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold two fingers.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one that grows into or onto the back of the toe, it is necessary that you cut first the rounded flesh just to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable joint for that, then cure until it be healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come together in this way come from birth, or from a sudden wound, or from burning by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it happens that you catch that sinew, if the finger must repair itself according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two fresh tendons or moistened draplets in rose oil, so that they do not become dislocated;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two subtle pieces of plantain, until the joint is joined, if it happens.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	They stick to one of these two with the palm, if you cover that stickiness as it is suitable.
des vils	bad humors
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	They are large, enveloped veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids, which come into many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they occur more in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the colon, and then the sap of the basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron cure is according to two manners:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that they catch and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another way is that you elevate the vein, and pull it out completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is made in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	raise the first leg of warm water very strongly, so that the thick blood is subtled, then hold the leg of the patient from above the hip down to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein in I, II or III, with a large incision, then elevate and pull out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until much of the blood has been removed as the patient's strength can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then let it go, and instruct him to abstain from eating meat and to take a black cole;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and resume the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The elevations of the bones are according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the leg of the patient, if it has much hair, then put it in a bath, and let the warm water flow over the leg until it turns red, and swells the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein from the loin to the head of the knee, or in the part below the joint;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and scratch the vein of this part, until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems thus like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then thrust the vein downwards, until it is raised from the skin, and then bend it at the ankle lightly, then apply it to another place thus in three layers;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then scrape the skin on the vein until it appears, then lift it to the root, just as you have done, and attach it to another ulcer, just as you had done previously.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	Then cut another incision, or more if you are a master of it, then lift it, and cut to the nail of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second incision.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract the incision from incision, until it is entirely free, then cut.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it, if you put a needle everywhere with strong double thread, and lift and pull, and you put underneath the thread, and turn your hand from one side and the other, until it is freed.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful not to cut, for if you cut, you cannot pull or lift, and it causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have treated it entirely, then place on the wound a mixture of wine and oil of roses;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the veins are constricted and twisted and entwined together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must bend them straight, but do not cut them;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it thus as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron instrument with which one cuts the veins is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so as not to cut the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the legs, in warm regions where no herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it affects another part besides the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that arises beneath the skin, as it grows within the serpent-like and twisted body, injecting itself between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the blood flow, and the vein begins to emerge, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the chest is open, it is necessary that you envelop around a piece of splint measuring one and a half inches up to two inches, and the nail, and leave the splint on the leg, and every time it is not in default, if you envelop around the splint, and the nail.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely straight.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction or swelling, and a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For what he chooses it is necessary to treat little by little until the head, and do not leave anything there or in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with the palms of the hand, or with X, and a man came to me, who extracted it from X palms long, and when you cut, if you insert I fingers or perforate, and pierce until the bottom, so that everything issues forth;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and let the matter that is inside be evacuated, and administer to the body medicines in the form of powders for no day's delay, then heal as if it were abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein is blocked, and especially when it opens into the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, and a lot of perforations come from it, and that's why it bursts.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Heal the wounds thus as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often has ox-like symptoms, and is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending, and one feels it well from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin or where it goes, and suddenly bursts forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is generated from putridity of certain humors, just like worms and serpents and lumbrics and ascarids in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and doubt not of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance returns, and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cure and treat, one cannot be sure but when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	Here is the translation:
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does, if it is that they run to the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly in place, then cover over, and pull back;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the patient's moderation of body by medicines that dissolve bad humors, and beware of eating corrupted putrid foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and can move from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see this which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered a swollen arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and I saw afterwards, it grew as swiftly as a vein on the shoulder, more quickly than anything, as swift as silver when it flows from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain departs from that place, and settles in the shoulder, and then a little afterwards corrupts throughout the whole body, so much that it comes into the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then I felt that it turned again within the body, as if I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I had wanted to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as if I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought to myself that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and therefore appeared constrained by that windiness.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it did not appear to me according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and restored veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you wanted to cure this illness, and the patients felt that pain, it appeared to you as we have said, if you lifted up and down hastily, and then coped with it so much that the windiness constrained at the place of the issue.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the limb;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your eyes, if the treatment of those who dispel windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and serpent-like pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their is that there are those which have large points, and small, and curly, and swoollen;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have two edges, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which falls in no member if it falls according to two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	where the principal member is affected, such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls then into no limb of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you afterwards, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it is necessary that you warn of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply implanted, so pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the signs of the brain when the arrow head is there and pierces the bone, and swoon strikes who is on the brain, are scotoma and numbness and dizziness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomittings of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is without force from the nostrils, or from the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it affects speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and swoon from the moist white wound resembling an abscess, and it swoons also as if bruised flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this sign appears, if you hold back from treatment, and extract the arrow so it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls into the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not loose.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a poultice, and in a short time black blood comes, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	you will then be without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow wound that never leaves the forearm is that without swelling of ecchymosis it bursts from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and quiets the cold sweat.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the thigh, it is between the small ribs.
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and it causes great anguish and great pain and sighing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow head sticks in the stomach, by chance it bursts from the wound with some undigested food.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow head sticks in the belly, and bursts into the intestine through a perforation, there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out in a flow, and the patient feels strong pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joints and the spine of the back and the ribs and the hips and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositional arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because that's why you should do something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happens to a man when an arrow or a lance wounds him in the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it, and drew it out from beneath the fat of the ear, and was without sensation.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And drew out a piece of an arrow that the wound had made in the fat of the eye beneath the skin, and the arrowhead was embedded, and could not be touched except for the point towards the hollow of the fist, and it was a large arrowhead from a Turkish bow, with the whole iron without touching the ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The game was successful, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears;
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the bristles, and subtly drew out as much as I could, and the Christian was without pain.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And he pulled out an arrow from the man, which was stuck in his belly, and thought that he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then when he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrow, and extracted it, and pulled it out strongly, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man with an arrow fallen in his back, and the wound is swollen above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained within him, and did not change his natural disposition, nor was there harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was swollen;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he remained thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And he pulled out an arrow from the man of the prince's king, which was stuck in his nose, and it was slightly leaning to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely removed.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to the treatment after it had fallen for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought a very subtle pulse, and did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt numbness and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I applied a digestive plaster to the affected place, because the humors were not inflamed.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the humors of the arrow appeared to me.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the plaster for many days, and the wound healed afterwards, and the patient remained thus for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day within his nose.
et il le me dist.	and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for many days, until it was opened, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which adhered to the flesh.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	Then I applied to the opening of the wound by that medicine water, so that the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it crossed well the limits for three months, and then I relaxed if the wound that I touched the tendons, and my hand on one side and the other, and could not issue;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make instruments, until I took it the next day with well-made tendons, according to what its form would come in the end of this chapter, so that I treated it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either by the place where they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps forth by there where it enters, it is the arrow entering into their flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is purified around, and the exit is eased;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and thus if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be so for some days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it jumps, and if it does not jump, you pierce everything around the entire subtle forest, so that the eyes around are enlarged, and then the treatment.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the vents of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if you do not treat it, but let it be until it is even after some days, for if the arrow comes just to the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed properly because it has been suppressed in the bone, and does not come out easily, and the patient remains many days without bad accident, so the engine of two treatments.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply fixed and cannot be extracted further, you should administer tareres around, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded in the limb of the body so that one cannot see it, you should seek it out thoroughly;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if the sensation draws to no suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve, if it is so that the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and draw out the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow a handle by which it holds, if you remove the flesh that is stuck to it from two parts to the muscles where you can, and then break or bend the handle of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully ensure that you do not break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, if you leave it until the surrounding tissue is purified, then remove it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood makes you act contrary, then amend what we have said about the treatment in this chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and set in motion how you can extract the arrow without danger, whether swiftly or slowly, or firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the form it was when the arrow fell in, for it is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears as nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it apparently.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut then upwards, so much that the tongs can grasp, and then extract.
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pulls it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the remainder of the arrow is there, cut all around the remainder.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the remainder is small, and you want to administer cutting, if you administer the instrument carefully, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then apply force, and if the arrow is barbed, apply the instrument to a pointed entrance, in order to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it suits.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow has struck the hand or foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the ribcage, and it is near the surface, and you can reach it, then you can cut around it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of cutting into a vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your craft.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the pushing instrument is similar to the quill of a bird, for pushing at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pricking and for extracting, that's how it is:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are thirty-one veins from which one bleeds, of which sixteen are in the head, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two veins that are behind the ears, called the two "herbech" veins;
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are visible in the temples;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two glands that are on the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and the lay people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the median is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basiliac, and the lay people call it "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilisk is on the right side, and they call it the "vein of the belly", and it's on the gullet, and it's the one that is operated on, which obviously opens into the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the savatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and the angular, and if it has two roots;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and where the feet are there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curvature of the pouch of the left side, and the second sopraine which is at the ankle of the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "ness", which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The wisdom of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient cataracts and migraine;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the limb where the veins are of a rough fabric;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then bind the patient's neck to a vice, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two dependent limbs of the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	search for the dots on your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above the whole vein, and cut and the skin and the vein together in two places of the traversal, and make the blood flow until you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then hold it and bind it, so that it will be healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is to emigrate from an old and worn-out eye, and a habitual and accustomed optalmia, and in the course of the bitter tears, thus are the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the health of the veins if it is as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and he feels the pulse beneath his finger, and then signs of an inflammation;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then raise the heart to the vein above your finger's index, and push the lancet beneath, and raise the vein above, and the cupping, just as you have done with the other veins, and make the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then lower the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healthy;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	we have already spoken of their coupling and their extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein at the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic nerve for ancient facial diseases, and for migraine, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and leave the vein until it is healthy, and no time will the abscess be opened with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	In no way, it does not suit that the flames are too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the sane of crossing, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The health of the two veins that are in the two arms helps his eyes, and the tone, and the complexion, and the orientation in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is that the patient stretches his neck twisting in no direction, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the health, and so the healthy one of crossing, a bit of the long flame a bit large, because there is no spot of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and place it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The health of the vein is not so valuable when it is affected by ague, and severely weakened, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is ancient;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the health is that the patient tightens his neck, then tightens his nose with his left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and holds it in the lobe of the nose in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deeply in, and make the blood flow according to the necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is almost fully restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The health of the two gums helps with the straightening of the ankle, and at the beginning of messelry, and many diseases, and epilepsy, and corrosion, and herpes, and similar things;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the health is such that the patient strains his neck now on one side then on the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient sits on a seat, then healthy is the vein of the loin a little widely open, then draws out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then do it again on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and hold the veins moderately tight, so that the patient does not strangle;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it be until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins of the livers above, if they aid in the hole in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and cracks of the lips, and bad nests and interior.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the leaf, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right leaf and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins;
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Here is the translation:
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health from underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healing of veins that are under the tongue helps afterwards the healing of the head, and it's in the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the healer is such that the patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a dark vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Heal then one and the other, and do not insert too deeply, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck that are commonly healed are healed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where we prick at the flame making a large scar, or subtly olive-like as if cutting into the neck, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are large and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame mirrin is very renowned, and it is wide as if you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins with a full flow of thick blood appearing, and that they contain thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it's the form of the flame-like Olivier;
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and is for purifying the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the vein to bleed heavily, and that it be wary of the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if it cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes out, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one should not prick the flame, but rather cut as if with a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica vein does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	where you want no vein of it, where you feel in his hand the opening of the vein in the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cope to the flaming ankle, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to recognize the hand of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the hand as much as you recognize the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then signs of the hand of the wound, and then stretch out the arm, and cope with the vein of the flaming ankle;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the hand swollen, for it is an artery:
eschui la donques.	search there.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it rising high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Here is the translation:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Here is the translation:
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be on paw, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not stanched, and it fails you, and the medicines are not present to you, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the treatments;
et estainche li sans.	and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of tape, and tie it, and take one of the middle parts and bind it well just up to the other joint;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the bleeding is stopped, that's good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then make a cure, as we have said, with powders that stop blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping agents are not grievous in more positions for the small size of the wound, and the power of the tension of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The health of the vein in the middle is such that it helps to draw blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that lies beneath, and if he presses too much in the wrong place, and he touches the nerve, and he inflames and the healthiest part becomes grievous, and by chance cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve is exposed many times, and if it does not expose itself in any home due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you sound the health of the instrument beforehand;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid touching the nerve with your thumb.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the muscles, then make it two fingers long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The health of the head is aided, which attracts blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to heal by pricking at the flame olive or at the flame myrtle, for it is the safest of all the veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to choose the lightest vein, and not to hurt anything if one fails the first time, and one starts again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, where one must not make a mistake at first, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not maintained for the purpose of guarding health, and for avoiding future diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the health be done in one of the three veins that are or are touched:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, devious, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should heal at the beginning of taking a cure in spring, and in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should heal on the first day or the third, after two hours or three dozen hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing that is administered for the diseases has no determined hour, but only when need is felt, by day or by night, at all hours and in all tensions;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus less than seven months until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they empty their intestines with a gentle clyster, if they have much retained wind, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful matters from the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should one be cauterized who is too full of meats, nor who is drunk, as long as it may be, nor those with dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and it is not wise to be cauterized after a passion of colic, and vomiting, and decay of the stomach, and multiplication of habit in a woman, and of labor, of watching and of fasting, and those who have lost all virtue, or by reason of the arm or the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	Then you subtly purge the humors, if his blood is thick, through foods and through beverages and through medicines, so that you have little power over him.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	Then you enter into a bath, so that nothing deflects him, to subtly purge the blood, and cleanse the vein of the worst that enters within the third, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and beware of that day's work, and of puncture, and of excess, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be gentle and joyful, and let the healers be higher than those whom one heals, and rub the arm two or three times, then extract the vein gently, for when it is too narrow or small, it cannot correct the blood.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the shoulder with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then anoint the healers with a little oil of a small vial, then put their right hand on that vein under the shoulder a little where they want to heal, so that the vein does not flee and fails to be struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	Because there are veins that flee as if they were cords to the healthy one, and if there are those that are full of windiness, so when you put the flame on them, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus it is among these.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, so is the wound too narrow, because thus it is necessary that the healthy ones be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a hurry, let them wait a day or two, and do not tie up the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perhaps they will come to a suppurating abscess;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Do not enter where it does not bathe, then recommences the health if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then insert the same flame directly into the entire flame right away;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and hold it a little hastily, so that the eyes are inflamed;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this happens often, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eye inflamed, do not recommence the health, and put on a little of lyre oil, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is mixed in this lyre that the oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then administer the lyre of oil to each health that you heal the veins, in order to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one puts it on the limb;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if you refine the sensation and separate it when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess comes, which happens often, especially when it is not healthy enough except at the time when the opening of the vein is small, be quick, and put on the limb a moist sponge in water and a little warm, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood flows from the vein, and if it remains on the limb after several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, master, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there occurs abscess and appearance at the base of the basilic vein:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Put your hand on it, and if you find the limb soft to the compression of the hand, then it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Beware then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it may happen in short time without an artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but you make the plaster thick to harden the limb, then you heal with another healing, until it be sound.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each person's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the wound is black, let it issue out until it be red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it be until it be subtle;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and so the flames be large;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits him better, and often, and you must do it in cutting obliquely, not in pricking;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of healing is free from decay of blood and gathering of nerve, and is worth more than the healing of a long or wide wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to one whose body fails in healing, it suits to give a soft poultice made from the juice of green apples;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if it is hot, draw out three or four times the blood; and if it is of cold complexion, mix beforehand a soft poultice in musky syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he falls at the vein, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he has broth of meat, and subtle, fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to clear his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when he is afflicted by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to clear his arm after the first bleeding, and it has hardened strongly, should be bled at the seventh hour after the first bleeding, or at the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to bleed from another part, should be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood inside the body that is already hot, and it causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if you need to treat a large quantity, and enlarge the perforation as much as it seems in the papyrus;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you re-examine all the conditions of health, and put your hand on the pulse when it is healthy, so death does not come into the papyrus, and this happens many times, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and you should not be afraid when you dislocate the arm, and let blood flow out a second time, and the perforation is closed, so you press firmly on;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if it is curved, he should extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it go as long as it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	where you touch the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the perforation of the vein issues forth, and put on the point of the seed removed from the water, and press on lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if a second bleeding is necessary, then open the same vein again, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the treatment is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fistula becomes red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it is tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the treatment now passes through the middle, neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the perforations be large, and let it be treated well near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get it out, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in summer, do not put the hand in warm water again, for one puts it more into winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the treatment of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The treatment of the little finger on the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Restrain the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein is swollen, if one sees it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you cross it over, and if you touch it gently all around, so that it does not hurt;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go too deep in the flesh, for the nerves are beneath, very close to the skin, and then put the hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out as much blood as is necessary for the task, then put oil on the vein and sew it up hastily, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the left hand is worth more than the disease of the right, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The wisdom of the soporific is valuable for all the diseases that are beneath the body, like diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of his blood is such that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs against the vein until it bursts, and places it above the joint of the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the veins are at the ankle, and above the foot many roots go out;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	bleed where there is a larger vein, or at the ankle, which is more suitable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you cauterize on the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and cauterize from above as when cutting in a circular motion.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames burn gently.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot flow out, put the foot in warm water, and let the vein open well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the wounds do not heal at first, restart a second time from above a little, because the lesions are salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not fear the nerve, as we have said, and thus make the swelling of the other foot equal.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic vein are at the level of the thigh, and their sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his wound is that the patient will enter either in a bath, and stretches above the knee three fingers in twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then anoint it in all the ways that you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better that you cut it, for the lesion is dry, and it is much more responded to by many hands at home.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, so is there no king of those who open or shut with two feet, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make the blood flow as you wish, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and hold steady;
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now without pain.
des sainies de ventouse	the health of cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping glasses are made of horn, or of brass, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and cupping is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping without striking is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either with fire at all, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and cupping done by striking and extracting blood is done in 14 places of the body, where one is entirely on top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other is in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the others are in the hollows of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the bruises underneath the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the bruises on the shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the bruises on the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the bruises within the arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the bruises on the legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the bruises on the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the bruising does not draw out blood, because of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one cannot be afraid to do it, as is done with healthy veins;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it does not seem that it should be administered, nor with all fire nor sense of fire, in any illness that comes from fullness, as long as the whole body is evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to bruise, or through accustomed practices, we will administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and within and in every tension;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they have mastery of breathing, then weigh heavily on their head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who find a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who sigh, and see by night blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the midst of the month, we command to apply a poultice after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The healthy state of the brain helps with the grief of the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it is not suitable that it should be after the evacuation of the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this breathing is in the place of the health of the cephalic, and it is not suitable that he who is of frigid complexion uses it, or has a catarrh, for it causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason it is not suitable for the elderly who have chronic cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often feel dizzy, they become oblivious, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower down due to the fear of obliviousness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation in the hollow of the neck is in the place of the healthy head and of the basilica, and for this reason it is worth more to the straining of the foot, and to the splitting of the channel of the forearm, and to the touch, and to the repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is not suitable for massage, because it holds too firmly, if it injures the spleen or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilations at the ribs of the neck are worth the pains of the head, and obstructions and migraines, and to the strangulation, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healthy basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is suitable that you instruct the healthy one to press his hand to put, so he does not touch the artery, and does not show signs of bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The treatments below the forehead are good for diseases of the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is on the healthy surface of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Here is the translation:
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The treatments on the sides are as good as those of the three large veins of the arm, for they attract blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon to not make too many perforations, for the flesh is naked of skin, and knows beneath the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping on the back is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of iron, so that it has mastery to draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and you make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cuppings on the legs heal openly, because they draw blood from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and restore the flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are in the place of two soporifics, and of two stimulants, and always they weaken the body after long use, and cause putrid matter to come in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the cupping is that you put it on initially void, and suck immediately, and place it hastily, and remove equally, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the red and inflamed spot, and feel the flow of blood;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then strike, and reapply the cuppings, and take heed of the disposition of the bodies, for there are those who have such a temperament, and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to make a single incision, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deeper.
et suce legierement.	and to suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to make two incisions:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to subtly open the way for the large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to make a third incision;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, then we suffice with a single incision.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, then we repeat often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the wound is deep, then we make a deeper incision, and the terminations are such that the blood flow is suddenly perceived, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have obstructed pores, that you open the veins of oily and dissolutive apertures:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is in this state, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of oil of cucumber seed;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in ivy, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is thick and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of anise, and the similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one heals a tender and large porous wound, it is not necessary to put any oil on it, but rather to wash it after the inflammation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he raises with vinegar, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have swollen superficies lift with old wine, or with elder water, or with a decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not suitable to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he warns himself, when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are healthy but choleric, and if their blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It is necessary to take cold things, such as green apples and endives and lettuces in the basket, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and small peas, and meat of pigeon, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, takes syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and small peas, and small peas and little birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he will be purging, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat beforehand or afterwards, to comfort the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtly purified, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The cuppings that are placed without causing harm are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagre, and on the stomach and the bowels and the loins and the thigh, for these members do not suffer from being struck in this way, and one does not perform it except to attract blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when the infant is healthy;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place ventouses on the belly and on the hip to diminish the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is opilation or stone, if remove by its attractive virtue by chance the opilation, or dislodge the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these ventouses are administered empty to suck up so much suffering;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot water is used, as in bad cases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the ventouse with hot water or with water in which suitable herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered to fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two large and half palm measures of depth, and it has or is next to the mileu a small perforation, just as if to push an aguille, and let it be of rainwater, soft in front so that it does not bother the patient when putting on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and have in hand a rod of across iron or steel, to put a handle attached, and they are large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the blisters of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin ones from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must thus put this blister on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the handle of wax or linen, and put it in the blister across the rod that is in the blister, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the blister lest it burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and be careful that it is on the part that we have said, so that when one looks, if the vapour goes, and remove the blister;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the linen as before, and reapply it frequently, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping that is administered in disease of the lungs, at every sharp point, there is no vein or perforation, and it is not administered except when it is full of sharp points, and is placed on the limb only slightly.
et c’est li forme:	and it is the shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without them being administered except on limbs where one cannot place cuppings due to their smallness, such as lips and cheeks, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in naked parts of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the use is that when you find cuppings that are in soft, gentle, and subtle places without roughness, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place a nut in a soft spot, until they become familiar, and have nothing in the way;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be purified of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place on the cuppings;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are swollen, and redden, if it is the place where one can put a ventousa, one puts it, for it is very valuable afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the place of the axle, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the places are too sore afterwards along the course of the veins, if you soak the linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, until the vein is constricted;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the vein is multiple, then put on a broken vitriol ointment, or galena, and similar things, until it be constricted;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the place many small peeled beans, and let them until they adhere to the place, then it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more of this craft, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the sinews do not want to take, then rub the vein of fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the sinew comes out, and then put them back, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will harden.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they begin to heal, then sprinkle on a little of aloe and of powdered broom, or of cinder, so they will now adhere.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish wise men do not get caught up in this chapter, for they did not find anything in the old books, nor did they read any letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is strange the science in our land, because I did not find anything good there.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I knew nothing, except through the science of old books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and through experiment, and through the habituation of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom puts its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising occurs to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing hinders you completely, just as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the tendon is not very strong, or too fragile;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and avoid eating cold foods, that is to say cold joints, and meat of goose and deer, and do not drink wine, nor eat too much fatty meat, and do not fill yourself too full of foods that fill the veins with blood, so you have no fear of hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to their first government that they have used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or it has viscosity, just as fermenting in water, and rice, and bread, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a suitable nourishment represents marrow and more quickly heals the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well restored or reunited according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, like the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is a cure, reset the broken bone on the large tendons that are hurt and join the limb together, so it strengthens as if it were before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not touch the entire extent of his work, and for this reason he must be nourished with thick broths, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a break that goes to the arvolt, and another in agitating, as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks all along a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner he has his own ingenuity, and his own proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory returns to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and appears well by palpation, and sounds to the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no distortion in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have distortion, or crack, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit you to move the hand, but put on medications that come hereafter, and then hold steady now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breakage which goes into crookedness, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses come to life, it does not matter a day, as long as the abscesses are calmed down;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it in a position where you can lift lightly and easily, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restorations of that which has pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then hold it straight, as it should be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is divided into two parts, whether it be hand or foot, or with your hand if it is small members, or with two cords, or with a cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the limb are rejoined, you reassemble them by all means in their proper places, and take care that through your work no injury or pain is inflicted on the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the bones well according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if you set it well, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who come to make an abscessed and contracted limb through their work, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, gently reprove the patient that they should not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so well adjusted that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, if it is not at all, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and you ensure that it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, like arm and finger and similar:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	if it is necessary to envelop the fragile and subtle parts with gentle and subtle bandages;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, like thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	if it is necessary to envelop with a wide and strong bandage, for the wide bandages embrace the entire large limb, and hold everything in place evenly, so that there is no slipping;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then light stoups are placed underneath, three or four according to the limb, and hold the hand a little at the end of the bandage, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break is slightly loosened;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take the other ligament, and turn around again above the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first lecture above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the stuffed ligaments of linen or cloths, until they are all equal, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then place your well-made probes, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put on something that appeases the hot abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and let it be so for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then hold with your probes, and let it be of a moderate size cane straightening, or of wood from which one makes the splints, or of palm branches, and let it be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the instrument one puts on the fracture be a little bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold steady on the instruments just as you did at first treatment, then tie above with a thread similarly, just as at first treatment on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the more constricted it is, the less so;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are large, as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted linen cords, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not matter that there is less than two fingers' width between each instrument.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after the tightening in their sound limbs, put beneath them a dressing of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become black.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the course is broken, I will tell you the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not suit to tighten these stars all at once on the broken limbs the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it does not suit to put these fleams there for five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the aposteme that suddenly occurs;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and thus is the method of the ancientemplasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist;
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that holds itself as walls of the mill, and mix it with a lot of egg, and put this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common method of the emplaster restoring fractures in many dispositions, and especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of emplaster restoring fracture and dislocation and twist:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	take absinthium and ladanium and enula and asafoetida and Arabic gum and mucus, in the name of X;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	mirror and balm, in the name of;
alechil VIIII З.;	Alexander VIII.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make powder, and mix with egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the man's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is valuable to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of plaster that is useful for twisting:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mugwort and wismary, in the name of;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	mirror and balm, in the name of VIII.
acaice VI З.;	acacia VI.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	bol armenic X., and grind well, and conflate with water or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and alleviates the sudden pain, and reduces the swelling of the bone, and the fracture:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new linen, and the thumb in wax and oil cooked, and place it on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore at all, but they are good for appeasing hot abscesses, and properly alleviating pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to apply plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to apply a plaster for the restoration of bone fracture and to diminish the remainder of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of oats, each one part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to treat more forcefully than the first, when a stubborn abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of violets, and seed of flax, balaustron, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all one part each;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and crush, and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrates says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken limb to restore it except for cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between two extremes, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply to the broken member, to restore, things which are a little warm, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of applying it that is good for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and chamomile of omes decapitate, or pens of bird's nest, and visnaga, and make them equal, and the broths, and make an application and lay it on.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then lift it up a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved out of its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you do not lift it up by hand soon enough.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or inflammation, without rest or swelling, hasten it, and lift it up, and remove the application now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and dip it in water, and lift up the place, until the inflammation ceases, and the pain is alleviated;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on a dry linen cloth, wrapped in a warm or rose oil, and lay it on a nut, until you are sure of a hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle treatment, and a bit of emplaster, and do not strain it too much as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have mastered the poultice and the bandage, then resume it, as you did previously in equal measure.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if it does not come to the limb nothing of what we have said, do not dislocate it further until after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is revealed, and approach the adjustment of the flesh above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then restrain it more than before, and let its flesh grow, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the dry limb more than the master is not, know that nourishments cannot come;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	raise the donor of warm water then, all the times that you dislocate, and it be each third day, and bathe a little the affected part;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work then the nourishments are cut off from the limb, and immediately it is seen that what the foolish doctor does, which twists the limb wrongly;
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is bad, and if it is painful work, and I do not see anything else but to soothe the pain and to open correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone breaks all the bone up to the synovial fluid which is beneath the bone, just like a hedge or a beam;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason it is called this type of fracture "breakage".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the spear point strikes the bone from above, and this type of breakage is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and it is the wound of these two great or small breakages.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a buried percussion, or fissure or break of the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating wound that approaches just below the skin which is beneath the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is repelled into the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small crack, and for this reason it is called this breakage "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound that is made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes the piece of bone go downwards, and it is like the joints are dislocated as when the blacksmiths strike on the anvils;
si entre li piere dedens.	if between the bones within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And it happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, like the head of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and there are all these ways of breaking which small pieces are dislodged if they are like this;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaking by the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into tendons, and by the corrupted flesh that is on.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the hair-like [structure] is known by that when one has uncovered the bone, and one rubs against it, then the black breaking opens.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breaking, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and feverish ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, lest it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an immediate accident, and you expect a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nave comes first to you, and it is in winter, then you must open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the break of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you sew up the fractured part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you take hold of the head of the wounded patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if a stream of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess bursts, then it helps with what it needs, and it is that you fill the place with moist draplets soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the bursting abscess is appeased, and be assured of a stream of blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begin to enter by the bone, and it is done according to two manners of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One manner is that you cut in a straight incision beforehand, and that's the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then you make another stitching even larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse incisions, some straight and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in working lightly, so that you do not harm the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce through with a strong instrument, thus you should make incisions with caution, not too deep so that they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the outer layer, and must have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have more of them, if each one returns to its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have instruments for every test.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and it's the form of the three kinds of cauteries:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality to perceive through the broken bone is that you put the cautery on the bone, and turn it towards your fingers until you know that the bone is perforated;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then put the cautery elsewhere a little afterwards, and do it all around, then scrape with incision instruments the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you hold as if with tongs, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and beware that you do not touch the brain or the vital organs.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have perforated the bone, and drawn it out, it is fitting that you reassemble the aperture which was separated from the bone with another instrument similar to an incision instrument, but it is necessary that it be more delicate and more subtle than the other incision instruments;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it remains of small bones, no useless scales, if they lightly lean on one of the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another manner of surgery is that which Galien says, which is more wise;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he praises it highly, and that's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this lenticular incision the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly tap the entire bone around, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is close to the bone, lift it lightly, for one lifts it with good sense and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is covered only superficially above, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to extract the scales with a subtle rasping tool which you must have in various quantities, to prepare each place most conveniently, according to the work and shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rasp before with large rasping tools, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, you must adjust the cause according to its direction.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and it is a thing which is not readily responded to by one who has put their study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is deep, it is necessary that you take a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and the balm in rose oil, and put it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and the balm in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first dressing;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and make it lighter than you can, so you do not aggravate the wound, then administer from above another lien, and do not strain it further than until it holds the wound sufficiently;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it thus for a day or two, until the aposteme heat is appeased, then disband, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of veal, and powder of incense, and aristology, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and I administer medicines without sharpness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and see that the wound is very clean, so you do not leave any swelling, nor do you permit it to gather pus, for when pus gathers on the fabric of the brain, it corrodes and festers, and brings great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one puts on the wound a sharp application, it numbs by degrees above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Here is the translation:
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no fever comes from the medicine that one has put on, which has such a virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue it into a plaster, and put it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal in many ways the cures that are necessary, so that it may be healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Here is the translation:
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and it is cartilaginous below, and does not break, if it does not make a wound or twist, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parties is broken, it is necessary that you apply your small finger or pointed tool to the nest of the bone, and make equal the breakage within your indexed finger, and at the pouch by default, until the bone regains its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it gently, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot come out at the joint, then it is necessary that you put it evenly on top of a straight rod a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the breakage is of two parts, you remake another, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscessed wound is appeased, then apply to the head of the bone, which is swollen with drapings of linen, if the breakage is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you break one at another's part, then the fracture is there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the holes of the nostrils.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that one must moisten the tents in mud, and move each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that it is good, but it is necessary that they be softened in the making of an ointment with egg white and powder of mill.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then let the tendon, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never break an egg in the place of tendons, and if you have a soothing plaster above, and hold the fracture, and soothe the patient within;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do what you saw.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are operating, if you meet cerotate or cotton mollified in rose oil, or in a little pouch of dyacolon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if apostemes (abscesses) do not come, then put an emplaster made with flour of sagum, and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then apply light poultices, and do not bind the nostrils.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break is not small, and it breaks into many pieces, then hold the instrument steady for that, next cut the splint, and treat things that grow wrong in the flesh, and suddenly, as with plaster and suitable ointments for that.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if he does not have within the break a naked wound, thus treat with tents, and I put canes of plank, so that it be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated downwards, and there is no wound in front, and the break is downwards only slightly, and it is not broken in two, because of the corralling within, if one examines it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and put the break within lightly, and hold it with the other hand by force, and make equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is dislocated upwards, then it is necessary that you apply extension to the upper part, so much that it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the teeth are moved away, or loosened, then hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a wax coating, and put on a double dressing.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place on the drapeau a well-made large staple, or an equal-sized piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and lay it on the muscles that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure changes, so dislocate it at the third joint, and then put back in place what is dislocated.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a plaster, made from the powder of soft mill with plenty of egg white or flour of psammite, after you have scraped off the crust.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and apply a light layer of plaster, and if the plasters adhere, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	many times it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses or wounds come, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken piece of bone that has been dislodged.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtlety of the surgical instrument handles convenable to that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, then enlarge it with a flame according to the necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not remain there, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to cauterize the flesh, so that it be healthy.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The fracture breaks many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	where it is broken and disarticulated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the operations are when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder where the force of the break is felt;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches out the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then put the fracture in alignment with your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and stand upright with strength, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put even the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot straighten the head of the fracture at the defect, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and puts the espaulier behind, and pushes the ministers below the shoulder, so that the bone of the fracture is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then reduce the fracture to your fingers, and if you find scattered pieces, it is necessary that you sew on;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and draw the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then take it to one of the incision makers that you have;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you put beneath the strength this instrument, to guard against the blood flow:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not a cheat, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the instrument;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and have two tools, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other be narrow, according to the routing of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, if you fill the wound with drainage and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come, thus much. It drizzles into rosated oil and in vinegar and in wine, and puts on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone the plaster of millet powder and egg white, and put light staples on, and put a splint underneath, if you are a master of it;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then put a double layer of drapery on the staples, and the plaster;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a subtle stick of three fingers width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains hanging;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and set the staple on the fracture, and twist the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy side, and beneath the affected side;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and the resetting of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture firmly, and you clearly see that the staple does not move on the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if it is restrained;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient sit on his back, and place it when he sleeps in a small sling beneath the healthy side, to lift the shoulder high;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if you align the fracture of the shoulder blade by aligning the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident occurs, until twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then recommence the plaster, if you see that it needs repair, and restrain it and leave it thus, until it is restored;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored to the best within 28 days, and less than none of them.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Because the shoulder breaks or enlarges not in a mile, and one does not know if it is dislocated unless by touching.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the shoulder appears according to the shape of the break, and you reset it according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the shoulder powdered millet with abundant egg white, and light poultices, and put on a double layer of cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on a large and subtle staple, a little larger than the shoulder, and adjust the staple so it is not bent in any part of the shoulder, if you employ that staple of poultices of linen, so that the staple is equalized.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then bind it all with a strong band firmly, so that the staple does not move from its place, and examine the ligament every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it is swollen, if he holds still, and puts the same level as it is far from its place, and directs the patient to his side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number of days is accomplished, if he dislocates, and be careful, for it is not the bone that sets itself lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes beforehand, and not below the heart, if it befalls thus, and the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the force to appease the hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The skin is not always broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it breaks often at the defect.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken within, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks agility, and all, and by chance vomiting blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and then senses are well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient directs himself thus on his back, and puts the cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly adjusts to put it evenly in all the ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then put on emplausters and stupes above the subtle star of salt, or another lighter fust, and envelop it in a drapil, and bind it to the broken bone, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and rewind each hour the lure, and if it is dislocated, then hold it fast.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to release, because of corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and release, and scrape off the emplaster, and address what has come in ways of cures.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the emplaster, and hold it steady until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breakage of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of ribs does not occur except in large ones after the back, and within the head, and they do not bend except because they are brittle.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and he feels well in the inquiry of the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the resettings are that you make equal the fracture, as it is fitting.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick, if you have mastery of it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain, and a puncture, just like a fullness, because the bone touches the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and he has sharp points, and he coughs and vomits a great deal of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old ones have put great skill.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflate the belly, in order to cure the rupture by filling the void.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, for hot abscesses will not come, if it has not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then bleed it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that some of these wounds that one treats with ventoses on the limb, to suck out the corrupt matter, and it is similar to reason;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt whether the ventose attracts the superfluous humors on the limb because of the weakness of its disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one must cover the limb of a injured thigh with hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the air inside, then one is cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone touching the membrane, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to open on the limb of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to ward off the siphac.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone, and draw gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat the putrefactions, until it be healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses come, place them on soft, moist cloths in rose oil, and apply to the affected area;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat meanwhile the area of those that are likely to form an abscess, and apply poultices on the affected side where it ought, until it be healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the breakage of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture comes to the soft bone of the neck, and little by little it happens that it breaks.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortally wounded in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when one touches them and presses, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so one has put a cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take care that the feet are softened, and see if the accidents are which are in the hands, and on the back there is ventilation and evacuation without willingness.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has swooned upon their belly, if they have lost sensation without control.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is swooning on his back and wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not labor in his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the thing most lightweight.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the care is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, put on the spine oil of roses or oil of musk deer, so much that it be appeased;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind with a ligature, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it be healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover over the heart;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and reset the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then apply the treatment of ointment, spreading on charcoal, until it be healthy;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the hip", you place your pouchet in your left hand, and put it equal to the other hand at your power, then apply the plaster and the steel above, so that you have mastery;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then hold it straight, and if there is a bone out of place, fix it above, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there is not a small amount of diminishment at the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and make a long splint, and decline to the perpendiculars, and comes to the patient's pain at the joint, and points, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are above the breakage;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know what the fracture and shape of it are;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the fracture is at the head of the wound, set it evenly so that it may be in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is very long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient sit on their belly, until the restoration of that fracture is apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it evenly, put it on the plaster, then put it on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the fracture steady, so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the binding is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a abscess occurs there, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, so that there is no bad accident.
et c’est li maniere.	and that's the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The joints are those which are between the rib and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	where one is to take a full plain of meoine gruel, according to this form;
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And lay the straps on the shoulders, and place them high up, and seat the patient on a chair;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then he throws his broken arm on the stake, until it reaches the socket, and has in the middle of a curve of stake, then places on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downward;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then put the mirrors to the breakage equal to his hands together, until the breakage returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his haughtiness, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is on the fracture with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the ligaments, and each extends to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the bandage below the break, and on the break, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the breakage is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put the mullien strap underneath the socket, and another towards the cot, underneath the breakage;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the breakage is towards the cot, it is necessary to put the lighter strap, without effort, until the breakage is even on the limb, and on the cot;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then apply equal pressure to the break, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that abscesses do not form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses form, do not hold it back for just seven days, and apply a warm poultice to the affected area with rose oil, until the abscesses are calmed down;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you place a dressing on the break, then assemble the arm with the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put on the bandage, and hold steady against the shoulder, and against the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, so nothing can dislodge it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, use a splint, and place on the break a larger and stronger splint than the others, and have two fingers' space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the break by three fingers' width on each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then hold steady on the staves, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about breaking, more strongly and less in dislocating.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the alignment of the staves, and the straightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if you leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look for three days at the bond, that it does not become inflamed and does not come to the limb, or the numbness cannot come to the limb because it is too strained.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you add, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accident occurs, then do not undo the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put beneath the joint a cushion plain of equal thickness, and look every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, nor are the bonds loosened;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If you address it by the power of medicine, and give the meat that we have placed before, in such a way that the meat is first subtly affected;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to take hold, it should be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg joints are restored in 40 days of complete rest;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must dislocate and administer baths and medicines of ointments to adjust the joint.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is lazy and swollen, it delays disengaging for 10 days or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "double" "foscile", one of which is small, and it is this one that joins the shoulder.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is this one that is below, towards the little finger.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	perhaps break the large "foscile" slightly, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small fragments are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large ones are broken, then the healing is bad, and worse than when they are broken and gathered together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's a small fracture that's only slightly broken, then you must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's a large fragment, then it must be stretched more strongly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch it on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small fingers be lower than the others, and thus the patient is crossed over himself, and the cushion is placed before him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then stretch out the ministers like arms on the part beneath his hand, or at the wrist, and another minister above at the top.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts his eyes equal, according to their better shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage it falls to pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no disarrangement that grips the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and bind with a bandage, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the fracture of a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses and wounds occur, apply a plaster made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and apply the plaster subtly, until the abscesses and wounds are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wax, and apply a plaster of millet powder with an abundance of egg whites, then put in the staves, and let the stave of the fracture be rather stronger, and a little larger than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it should have six staves or arms in more dispositions;
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	so that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold more steady on the fracture than other parts, and touch less often when approaching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages be those that are on the bruised parts, soft and moist, and not hard or dry;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, which it is strained from, be of linen, neither too large nor too small, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rewind the limb and the ligament after several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as inflammation that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you bathe the limb with warm water, until the inflammation is appeased;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be tightly bound, but rather rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the strapping, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones disjointed, and similar things, adjust them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take a warm poultice that the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it stay there for some hours, until the numbness is corrected, and then hold it steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not undo the dressing for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	where he turns inward, then he puts his hands to his neck, and let his neck be equal, and beware of movement and degitation, and sleeps on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or in 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the combinations and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers, there have been few fractures, and it does not come but rather frequent dislocations.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the joint of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient should cross their arms, and stand straight in front of them equally.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and set them equal with the mirrors, as long as they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the poultice and the bandages, lest abscesses come, then I put a staple according to the quantity of the humor;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is in the partition within the belly of the sole, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken plant;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then bind it with a long bandage, and let the staple be of soft leather as large as the plant of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a staple on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and stop the fluid between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the break comes to one of our fingers, it's the swelling, set it even, as it is necessary.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and hold with the sole of the foot, and if you see that a straight small stick is placed to lift the break, and does not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the break is in another finger, just like in the index or one of the others, set it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	where you bind them together in a straight line, so they don't move, or you put on a splint, just like a swelling.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and squeeze out what comes from them, just as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the hip is often broken, and you can see it well when it twists in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is when one lays the bandage on the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	The patient puts it on his face, then each minister extends his bandage to his equal part;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and that is when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, let one of the straps be towards the finger and the other strap below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And thus it is close to the knee, and then the bandages are below the knee, and then the extension is downwards;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the mirrors to the bone equal with its two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and there, where abscesses do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	the bandage is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture a strong double bandage in two or three layers, and remove the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the ankles come to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread above;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the break this splint, and put a spike on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	Then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft fabrics to equalize the constriction, then start to bind firmly three or four turns on the break;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when you go further up on the break, it constricts less;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then thread the two heads of wire that you had placed between the leg and the thigh, and bind three splints that are above, then return to the lower end of the wire, until you come to the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and constrict it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that neither an abscess nor swelling nor another similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, if it dislocates, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are fragments of bone that hold, one must extract them, so that one can sew;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, one must break the bone, and make a new joint;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the fracture of the hip occurs thus, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	in any case, in the restoration done thus, it does not hinder the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And you should know that the hip is restored at the joint, either less or more, according to the diversity of the complexities.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee joint there is little breakage, but it often folds.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's not just a crack, or a perforation, and it has a complete wound, and feels a wound, and this feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is done by setting equal what is crooked to its joints, until it is assembled as much as one can.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then put on the splint, and set a round stele, if you are a master of it, and hold it as it is fitting, then reward all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, like hot abscesses and similar things.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	if one applies to each accident what he needs, as long as he is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "tibia", and the other is called "fibula".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all alike. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bones are broken, they turn beforehand.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it is clearly seen.
et torne desoz.	and it twists awry.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then one should provide extension, and set it equally, and lay the splints equally.
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but always, it is necessary that the fracture be gentle, and there are many pieces, so that the extension should be minor and lighter.
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and apply the ointment according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two straight branches of fir wood that encircle the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee joint up to the thigh.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap it in two layers of bandages above and below, and tie it in the middle, and at this wrapping the leg will not decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should administer two rods as long as the leg, and it is of fir wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make it in the fracture or where there is a wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and reset the leg each day, to see if there is an abscess or another accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if he heals so long as he may be healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the hip, there does not come a point of breakage, but at the double bone sometimes comes breakage and at the two little bones, and it is not necessary to have a fracture in more than one disposition.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if he has a broken bone in his foot, and you see the bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and now place your foot on the joint where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then put the plaster and bandages on top, and place under the belly of the foot a small table at two flat planes, then hold the foot firmly, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether broken, whether dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if some of the toes are broken, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then put on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider, then place under the foot that table I mentioned, and hold it firmly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, break them, place a star on each finger according to its quantity, wrapped in a bandage of linen, and hold the table steady beneath the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be standing on the top of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and attend to each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	from the fracture of the bone one should prick
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, if it makes her sit enlarged, then incline it to the back part, and let it be held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the container with the natural remedy for the wound of the thigh, and put therein as much as it can hold;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then strip the woman, and lift the back slowly and gently, and then jumps the cotton, until it reaches the entrance of the womb, and returns the bone with the stool.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or more.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	if it will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of berries, and tie a string to the perineum, and insert the whole bladder into the womb.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the string forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the womb will return the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the hip of a man or woman is broken, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and they are not hidden from these nearby fractures to one who applies his study and his practice, and intends my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture signifies more dispositions the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	while giving them.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	At the break, when it is fractured, take a mouthful of oil and anoint the break;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap drapels around, and leave it three days or thereabouts, and it will be quickly healed.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be set in place now, so that the healthy ones that we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, and the treatment with vitriol fails, and you have no other remedy, then recommence to restore the break in the same hour, or that day, lest abscesses come from it.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come from it, leave the restoration until the ninth day, so long as the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, lest you cause a bad accident to happen.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered skin of the chest, it is necessary that you set it in place lightly with your hands, with small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension does not appear to you for putting equal in your hands, then take this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four, according to what he needs in each treatment of fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be rough and a little thick, so it doesn't swell at the compression on the limb in your work, and be gentle beforehand, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainché", because it requires that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone of the joint;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and the ends to one time, as much as it regains, and be equal one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, it requires that you cut into the head of the bone, so that the instruments have a grip on it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot set the bone, as we have said, if the handle of an instrument convenient to this, or incisor or saw, is in your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then reset what has remained in the bone of asperity and minor scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	Do so much that it is in its place, then moisten it with a strip of black wine, and properly if it is in this state;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the wounded area except oil, so that it does not cause rotting and decay;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer these when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the splint;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times they have done foolish things, and have brought about death or corrosion to the patient, or mortal decay;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the strappings be more gentle and softer than the other splints.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, then it is not necessary to put these on.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but envelop it around, instead of these, with thick dressings, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see afterwards in the morning or evening to apply a remedy to the wound, if you have put on all good wine, and you mix it with healing remedies, as you mix tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the bone returns to its lighter course.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens many times, and it cannot be joined back but returns to the bone, knows that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tenderness, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what he said in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and opened on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death comes, but let it be until it heals.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perhaps it will scab over by itself after 20 days or 30, then you can treat the wound, if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come onto the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come across this after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a difficult thing to see the proper shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and perhaps it cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care that our hand is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer medicines in the form of stickers, such as aloe, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine in the form of a sticker, or with a lot of water, or with oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and he puts them on the nail in stumps, and holds it well, and does not dislodge it for a long time;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then he dislocates it, and starts again another one, until the nodes are removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	where you hold onto a well-made piece of plaster;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of the plaster is that it removes all the swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the node is already converted into hardness like a stone, and it needs to be removed, then scrape above it, and make the superfluous flesh appear;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	where you take it to no rasping, until it is removed, and the treatment until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the recovery
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the break of the bone is restored, and it remains afterwards with weak and subtle limbs, then it happens for many causes:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is for this that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, and could not bring nourishment to the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to a multitude of adornments;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too great movements, not in their proper time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because it has little blood in its body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood may be multiplied in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply poultices to the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and often removes tedious water, until the nourishment flows into the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and restore to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member is twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not perform its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say that one should break the limb anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this practice is blamed, and great evils come from it, and sometimes death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	however, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with warm water, or that mollifying herbs be applied, as in the case of vismalve leaves, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make a mollifying plaster, as one makes dyaquilon well, and take the mucilage of vismalve, and mix it with fat of goose or oil of sisament, and apply the plaster on;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	where you take ripe figs, and crush them with fine flour of colin, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And often is the knot removed by continually and extensively rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let the member be gently moved every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortured area is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be opened with iron, if it is necessary to cover just up to the bone, at the subtle incision lightly;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply cupping and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it must now be brought back into alignment.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if we delay, the eyes will swell, and perhaps by chance it sets back into its place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it is not necessary to move it to the hour when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	it often brings on spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	in any case, when it happens, if you make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the abscesses and wounds are appeased;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then arises the member from warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and cure each member as the cure comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the main joints up to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Because the jawbones are often dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the arms are in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are a little displaced from their places, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	where they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entwines its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to a better position through several manipulations.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the ministers take hold of the head of the patient, and insert their fingers like a pouch into one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other finger of the hands should be straightened, to set even;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften them, their jaws, and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers place them evenly, until they regain their proper position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the joints are stiff, especially if they are the two jaws together, if they rise from hot water and oil, until they reset lightly;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not touch the stiff joints, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without being softened, if you put on a moistened cloth made of oil rose and wax, then tie it lightly with many ligatures;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and his head be between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor exert himself too much, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are numb;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then advise him to eat lightly, and not struggle to open his mouth to the manger and the drinker, until the jaw is well-set and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be adjusted to a point at one hour, and are not converted to their proper places, then fever and severe pains come, and perhaps a disturbance of the stomach, and perhaps a vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it's a perilous condition;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times dies the one to whom it happens, within 8 days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge from the side where it is continued and from the foot, and it is dislodged many times at the defect, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on his back, and stretches out his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the head which is towards the side cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates again, reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the poultice and the bandage, and hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and likewise the head of the spine is reset, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is that it dislocates at the part of the joint above;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part behind the pis;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes it dislocates at the upper part, and that happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate within for the tendons;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often it dislocates downwards towards the joint, especially to those who have little strength, for they have a hasty gait;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have sufficient flesh, let them prick at the tips, and re-enter at the tips.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fall, and inflame the shoulder of a hot abscess, and believe it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is necessary therefore that you test it, until you are certain of it;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocations occur when it falls towards the axilla, and makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axilla touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movement;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touch;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not forced to reset, when it is new, or if the patient is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient high up, then place their fingers beneath the shoulder blade, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it high up, then place it beneath;
si venra hastanment.	if it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the minister should gently soften and soothe, as with a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and melilot in warm water, and be soothed;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then let the patient be laid on his back, and place beneath the shoulder blade a piece of linen cloth, not too soft nor too hard, then place the mirrors on the heel, and lift the head of the shoulder strongly, and treat the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and other ministers touch the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see that you reset it according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and it is that you make the bone which is more massive than the patient's;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is straight towards the rib, and puts the shoulder below the patient's axis, and lifts the axis upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and other ministers pull the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And you reset it in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is that one fixes the long stick on the ground, so that the head should be in the same position as the piston, and should not be too large or too slender;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it is placed under the patient, but so that it has soft drapery above, and the patient is stretched out along the length of the stick;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then let his hand be extended downward from the other side in a formation, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a stick of two cubits in length and four fingers in width, which has its head bent to enter obliquely under the seat, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	Then place the stick beneath the head of the two folds, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it under the seat of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and stretch one's arm on the stick of a long length, and place the joint on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on the crutch of a large chair, and let the hand be extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint returns to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a layer of equal linen, then apply the plaster made with powdered mill dust, with incense and egg white, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain there.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary to eat little, so that the limb may be comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of its place due to moisture or another cause, then it is necessary that you apply cauterizations at three points, as it is described in front of this chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched out or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the chest, and the shoulders, or behind, if it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and one administers another remedy.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal until he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes numbness to the limb, and later on movement, if the patient often bathes, as long as that numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the arm is dislocated at points, and at points returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it is dislocated in all parts, and likewise in front and behind, and the dislocation is not relieved, for one sees well and feels well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the affected joint with the healthy one, if they can see each other openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is strained, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it thus, lest abscesses develop in the vicinity, for if abscesses develop in the vicinity, it would be grievous to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be reset entirely, especially when it is behind.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	if it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend your hand with your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and his arms should be spread out, and the hands with fingers aligned according to the count on the outside and inside, and bend the joint at his fingers together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fixes from the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold two ministers, so that it does not move at extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer of cloth long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the fingers join the joint to his hand, anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then bend the joint forcefully, until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in its place, set a dry plaster on with an egg white, and hold it firmly, and bind the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is closed in its place, then disentangle the ligament, and let it go.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint does not close well, then restart the dressing and the ligament, and let it go thus for some days, until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	then disentangle it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels grittiness after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	where you put on the joint a fat sheep's bladder, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the bladder back on, and then enter into a bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two or three times, until it is healthy.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, if you put on a moist warm cloth with butter, and hold it steady;
si revenra a sa disposition.	if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more so than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to reset it quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limbs may be inflated, or lest an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reset is that you put the sick hand on a table, and stretch out the little fingers, and align them equally, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and bends it until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, it is necessary that you examine if it is well in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then put the sick hand with its palm on a table at extension and reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on a table, and the doctor places their hand under the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If she returns now, it’s good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then the strain of full abscesses calming down, and let it thus begin to feel better.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot set it in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is anointed, and cannot stretch anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then know that the veins are cut, or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy except to stretch by fire cauterization in this case, and by chance it is not worth anything else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and let it go immediately, then release it and let it be thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no swelling, apply the warm water poultice, and rub until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	The fingers of the hand are dislocated at each part, sometimes in the back of the palm or in the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then the fingers are straightened, and set the dislocation in your pouches as much as it grows back, then hold the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disjointed;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it be still for a day, and then set it even on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and do not touch the limb, as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and make it move, and set it back in place;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is straight, and do the same, if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same, when it is dislocated in another way.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	for the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur with great violence, and cannot be held back, and often some member is softened, either the two hips or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the spine changes to four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which changes in the back is called "humpbacked";
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is that you beware that the gibbosity came from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no remedy nor healing for the entire body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures speak in grand words, where there is no great benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the chest before, there is no engineer who heals it;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to the ribs, and one cannot cure unless it is that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on his face in an even level, and have support beneath him, so he does not slip.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then place the file on the patient's head on the ground firmly, and another at their feet, and bind a bandage around the patient's joints, and another at their thighs, and at their knees, and at their ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers take care of the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two files;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well fastened, the file as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it settles back in.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not settle back in through this treatment, take a table of three long arms, and fix it beneath the patient, and let the patient be on their side, and place the head of the table beneath the patient, then put the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place the mirrors their feet on the other head of the table, and press well, until it settles back in its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, if you do it at the turning point which turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you place two tongs at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet the other two, and between each tong, above and below, a palm's width of space;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and let there be in each tong a perforation, where the turning point runs, and let the tongs be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two tongs let there be a turning tong, because the ligament turns, and let there be in the two turnings two small tongs of a palm's width, to turn the turning point;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then loosen the ligament that is among the bones at the turning point towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turning point, and each of the ministers turns their turning point to the entire ligament, and the masters put the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, place a plaster of desiccative with an abundance of egg white, and then the staples, and then the steel of a three-footed table, which grips the limb of the gibbosity and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligature, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient's restoration, until they are sane.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if nothing comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer mollifying and soothing medicines, with the steel that we mentioned before;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes one administers a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back of the spine behind the ribs, and believe that it is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it's the bone that opens, because one shouldn't have false confidence:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out of place through dislocations, not otherwise like the other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the thigh is dislocated in three ways:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	upwards and downwards, forwards and backwards;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more upwards than the others, and a little dislocated forwards and backwards.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the sign of its dislocation upwards is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the injured knee than the healthy one, and the injured person cannot bend their knee to the fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the limb that is below the inflamed abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of him who is approaching death are that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of the one who has it forwards are that they stretch their leg according to its full length;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	In every way, do not suppress the painful knee, and if one wants to make it better, if it cannot walk beforehand, and retains its urine, and inflames the ankle, and when it gets worse, it passes onto the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is going backwards, it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the level of the ribs beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The remedies of this kind of dislocation are such that you rewind if the dislocations are old, and it remains according to its disposition, if there is no suitable cure;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it does not seem that he has a good prognosis.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it's one of the four manners of dislocation, you hurry to turn the joint, and stretch inside and out, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	perhaps it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary that you apply the minister strongly, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he puts his hands under his haunches, then tightens with a soft thread on the hip;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another holds the head of the thread;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not work, then it is necessary to put a similar remedy.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the buttocks, it is necessary that you place the patient on his healthy side, then put the thread at the root of the hip, and the joint that is under the groin, then stretch the thread upwards towards the groin, and towards the strength.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large joint of the hip of the patient, and stretch it to its former shape.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft lien above the two heels, and above the two knees, and so the injured leg is extended more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let it be suspended from the top of a beam, and let it be above ground level for a long arm's length;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct the minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be suspended with the patient, who will strongly embrace the hip, because the joint returns now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the back, thus guide the patient, as we have said in one who has gout, and stretch the lien on the injured leg properly, and on the foot also;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then place two splints, one on the head and another at the feet, then fix a splint between the hips of the patient in this shape;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have moist cloths wrapped around, so that they do not bother the patient, then stretch each minister towards him, and the doctors place their hands equally at the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put them on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibosity, and adjust the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and put the doctor's paw on the affected limb, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to stretch the affected limb downward, nor lift it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip were dislocated at the back, just as we have said about the positioning on the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it be on its face, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and one should press upon the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be a point when the patient stretches out his legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the joint does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let it rest for three days or four, then undo it, and apply the plaster on top;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, bind them, as before, and let it be for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then undo it, and make the patient walk slowly, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	about the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	it is to know, inward, forward, and backward;
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate at all points beforehand.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if they do not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their face, and put their foot against your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your two, then bend the two sides of the knee jointly;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister extends their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that it adheres well to their thigh lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the plaster above, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then release it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not bother the patient to get up, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all, if administration of strengthening treatment is strong, as we have said in the cure of the thigh, so that it may be healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and inward and outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the tendon is swollen, and stretch before the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the remedies are lighter, and one must extend them lightly with their hands when they are slightly bruised.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the whole, then you must make the patient sit upright, and pull gently on the limb above the tendon;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left hand twice, then stretch it upwards, and set the foot well up high;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do it twice, as we have said, setting and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns to its place, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, start the work again, for it returns;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if he cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and hold the passages firmly to the ground between his hips, and throw blankets around him, so that the patient does not faint;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then tie the ministrations to the hip, and another ministration stretches out the foot with his hands or with a strap, so that it lies on the column of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch out each ministration equally, and the passages should be again between the patient's hips to hold the patient when they are stretched;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation with his hands, and another ministration ties the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return hastily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at a point, put the plaster and stoppings on top, and hold it firmly, and attach the foot to the leg, and beware of the nerves that are above the Achilles tendon behind, so that the ligaments are not too stretched;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then let it (the hairs) remain two or three days, and hold them steady with a bandage.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then dislocate it at the third day or at the fourth, and delay sending the patient away for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses appear, you must touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended without effort, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the two toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a board with two edges, then hold it firmly, and let it remain three days, then dislocate it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and have him rest, until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and of dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and slow, not hasty;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use soothing remedies at the beginning of things for a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb in its place now, so that the hot abscess may leave;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, then administer soothing remedies for hot abscess, and heal the wound, as it requires, with dry ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and it is with dislocation to breakage, and often you will not succeed, if you reset the bones, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worthy of you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body.
