O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Your voice, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of assembled medicine and have finished it through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from top to bottom, thus the science has perished and is decayed, and there remains nothing more of the fuels than the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I want to revive the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will assemble the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands were found in our time, is the art of medicine extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to thoroughly learn the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and their movement and rest, and how they issue from there.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name is not much with the name, and with the work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, if he is not careful he will fall into error and harm people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Therefore I have seen many of those who practice this science and abandon their sense and their experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut into an abscess or swelling on a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of the neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood flows out that the woman falls dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another mirror who treated a stone of a man's urine, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he took away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if they had operated on him, he would have died.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another mirror who took in care the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage he had a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the mirror blamed ignorance for holding the breakage against the wound with very strong binding, and did not leave the wound any discharge, and thus he left it in this condition;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he ordered that it should not be dislocated again;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and thus it remained until the leg was completely swollen and the foot, and came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I am called to come to him, and I hurry to come to release his leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I saw it dislocated thus it was in a country and he did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed on the limb, and I could not heal it;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb so that the entire limb became almost entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And he saw another doctor who burst open an abscess that was hidden, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of his lordship's malice.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch with iron unless the place is entirely clean so that one can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	it is to know, whether there is danger in many dispositions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish mirrors cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in a cross, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way that for God's grace you come to health and be praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the maladies to reveal the grievous sanity;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and lift your arms from that which makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may be able to come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galen says among some of his warnings:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take on the care of a bad disease, lest you be called foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauterization and medicinal cauterization, and these chapters are arranged from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and about the forms of instruments, and the iron tools of cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and extracting arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it is the ordered chapters and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered according to the lower head just as feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid, and the harm, are the longest words and subtle science and the secret responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and from these they speak of the wisest men, and agree with them;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and I suffer little from their words, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, before the two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	it is to know warm temperament without material, and dry temperament without material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In warm and dry temperaments together with material, they devised none and said that cautery is a great aid;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery is of no value for an illness that comes from chill and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is warm, and it should not be used to cure a warm illness through chill, nor through dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and he said that those who say the opposite, that cautery makes great aid to warm and dry illnesses that come in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of the man and its moisture according to the complexions of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times through experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in no way, one should not interfere with those who have experienced it, and who know through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of time;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have not so much fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it is not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The fiery remedies pass from one member to another by transmitting, and bring the diseased limb to a grievous sanitation;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and sometimes kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is established on the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I withhold the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of the body, as the philosopher said in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	for you receive in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree at the time when they should be done, the cauteries, and choose promptly.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries that occur are easily cured by the aid of cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and meanwhile the cauteries are for necessary pains and swift ones that cannot wait for the time when greater evil may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think of anything, dear son, if you make the foolish mirror;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the illness that is healed by cautery has no relapse;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say it thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not so as they think, because cauteries are not just a medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the speed of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and its dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease comes at some time according to the temperament of the patient and the location of the illness and its power.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are gathered in him the excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauterized in a place where there is little excess and moisture, just as cauterization is administered for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and that is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization is valuable after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauterization the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures for any illness and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient ones said that cauteries of gold instrument are more effective than those of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of gold and because of the height of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the eyes of the cautery do not make a bad wound, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, as they said loudly.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And always when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of gold, and it is quickly cooled;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if one heats it too much;
si font au feu;	they make at the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough of impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we do not use cautery of iron that we have not made appear in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter concerning the wounded head just below, because the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and it is used for the cause of an illness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for a multitude of sounds and pain in the teeth and pain in the throat, and also for all illnesses that come from coldness such as paralysis, sodic and apoplectic diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by solvent medicine modifying the head three or four times, according to whether the strength and the age and the habituation of the patient can suffer it;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the patient's head steady.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then have him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on your thighs;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and there where your two fingers meet, if it bleeds from the notch then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", because that is its form;
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the marked spot of ink, and do so by descending and extracting your hand little by little while twisting;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand slowly, and reward the spot if you see the bone I small;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, restart the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	afterwards take a little silk, and place it in warm and soft cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and let it be for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after putting a soft cloth in a pouch;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and let it be until the inflammation is reduced;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the old men said that the more one delays opening the wound, the more it suppurates;
et por ce si aide mues.	and therefore it is helped little by little.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one should not leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And the others say that one should cauterize as long as one leaves it on, and thrust so strongly that one abates from the bone as wide as the veil that women put in their hair to collect the humors that issue forth;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one should leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards one should cure and sew it up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two manners of cauterization do not seem to me to be good at all, unless in some men where there is a way of fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should let them grow;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and also when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more healing and soothing for me, and that's why I often work together in harmony for health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain at the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the entire head comes with chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then one should use the patient's remedies of ghee and pills that are called "cochie", and purging of the head and eyes and applying plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one performs the cautery that we mentioned before, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize beneath that one, a little of what we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After performing fire cautery on each horn-like prominence of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and perform the cautery where it is called "vasels".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and it is the joints in which one puts ventoses;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and elevate your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patients feel too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the softness of the head, and this is the method:
dou cautere dou chief	for fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head sudden pain comes, and the disease is extended to the eye, and the head is purged by Mondificent medicines, and other cures that I have said in the division of diseases are made, and all this does not profit:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then you do cauteries according to two methods, namely knowing of medicinal heat and of iron.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauteries of medicinal heat are that you take a bundle of hot ashes, and remove the scorching and recoat it with a little powder on the heads, and then make a temple where the pain holds in such manner that you may reposition the bundle of hot ashes beneath the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is repositioned, bind it and hold it well and leave it thus for 12 hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then unbind it and draw forth the bundle of hot ashes, and leave the wound thus for 2 or 3 days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put on a cotton dressing soaked in water so that it penetrates to the bone.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of the wound until it be sound;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that I have written about some burning medicines or twelve treatises on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery to where it is in the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a nail or it has little curvature, and appears small in appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and twist the iron a little more gently, so that most of the skin where the burn is should be eased;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so the artery does not become hard, which is of no use, and abundance of blood will flow out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards apply cotton to the wound, and place it on the spot for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply moistened cotton to the wound, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healthy;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this emigraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at all points, and beware of cutting the artery in this emigraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the emigraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat migraines as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and iron do not suffice for him, then it is necessary to burn the cautery which is called "cultellare" so that it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and sign thus on the dull eye a line of half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and hold it so that you do not touch the artery and do not reach just to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the mandible that moves when one chews, and the nerves do not have regard for the movement and that spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the disruption of blood from the artery when it is touched, where touching has great fear and mistrust in him who does not know himself, and who is not a student and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the vein be in my way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to staunch blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it happens.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy at the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healthy;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two edges;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and these are better cauteries than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and we have applied solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncturing all around the ailing ear, or around the two where the pain takes hold in both, and you will separate a little below the root of the ear before you have signed the place of the incision;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and let there be ten points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing, let the limb be sound.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Pains that must be treated with cauterization are not fiercer than those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not apply cauterization to similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this kind of pain that moves with flux of waters and purgings of head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and put the cauterization on the part that appears healthy, and make it cauterized at the top of the ear a little below the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let the cautery iron remain on the skin as long as the heat of the heart is felt;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is similar to the scalpel that we have placed beforehand, but it is a bit more subtle and requires that the cuts be a bit larger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after healing the wound, let it be as I said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit, and the patient has no fever, then you make four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	Two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one on the spot called "vassels" as we have said before, and the fourth cautery on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let it be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and pills that purify the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	afterwards place on the patient's head a plaster of mustard which is written or treated in treatises on plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the manner of cauterizing:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is thus healthy, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not, make three cauterizations on the skin of his head descending to the neck, and leave a space between each cauterization of two fingers' width;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat him as the others, and if you see that he is troubled, and the patient is suffering, make one cauterization in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the mastery is, two others on the two horns, and treat until he is healthy;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery which is called "olivare" be, as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be treated with years and with what we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	afterwards treat the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, then make four cauteries on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it be until the worst heat is absorbed, and lift your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until he is healthy, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" that we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	from epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to moisturize the brain with years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffers from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, then make a gargling and mastication soothing the brain often with good foods;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king's arm is set in a circle, and you make the fire cautery according to what we have said before, and apply the fire cautery on the little vessel, and on each corner.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is strong and suffers, make fire cauteries as I have said to those who are paralyzed and have softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive-tree fire cautery be according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross humors, then apply the cautery of such cauteries as we said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive humors declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain according to what was said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After setting the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after making the well-made lint tourniquet, just like a circle, if you put it on his head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient will be crossed, and be well held from all parts;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after applying the bandage, and wrap with a layer of old heather berries;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it with tempered fire, so that the fingers can endure the pain of the poultice.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After seeing the circle deep within the head, let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this for the patient every week once with another good government, as long as he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Where you see that you are cauterizing, make points more often throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This manner of cautery softens the brain equally;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on cotton wool moistened with butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	from the warmth of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient something warming the head, and the guard against all moisture, and let them sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Afterwards, command him to shave his head, and make him undergo cautery within the head, and apply two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the brain is in both eyes, or if the descent is in one eye.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cut all the cauteries to all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a piece of cloth as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incising cautery how you will anesthetize it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and sometimes one makes a cautery or heats it beneath the two back bones.
dou cors des larmes	because of the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that appear at the top of the forehead;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that it is from the cold, phlegmatic superfluities, then he makes the cautery that I spoke of at the beginning of the treatise descending to the eyes;
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I make a cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or heating beneath the two back bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it is more bothersome, then one should cauterize gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	They burn the tears back behind the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give three bad drinks to the patient.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after the king's head, and make a cautery or a thousand gold cauteries;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavulis" on the two sorrows, a little below the eyebrows;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery that you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavulis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the pupil of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	of where it is in the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that make two cauteries on the two sorrows as long as the sorcils are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave your hand there unless the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	It never happens that the hair of the eyes is converted to baldness, and pricks the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	It is to know of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a healthy state;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after marking on the paper of the eyes a figure that is just like the pattern of a dead man's brain, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put a cotton wool moistened with egg white and powder of pearl on the eye, then heat the cautery to the form that it is;
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing on the figure that you have marked, little by little, many times, so that the vein is burned in that place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of health in the skin are that you see the parchment-like skin drawn back, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and let it be for three days, then I put moist cotton in a bag until the inflammation is removed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of the joint until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after that the hairs grow, and the parchment-like skin is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same spot, just as you did previously;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are burnt, then cauterize until the parchment-like skin is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye with the hairs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The fiery medical cauteries are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as long and even as they can be, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and lively chalk, a dot of each, and crush them well together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it hastily, so that it doesn't cool, then spread it on the form you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease holds in one only solacement, one must open in one, and if it is ambidextrous also;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and put beneath the eye a cotton wad moistened with egg white;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and let the head of the patient be in your health and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press the poultice and move it every time the patient feels biting from the medicine, for it feels biting as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the biting is past, lift the lever of awe, and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted also as it was lifted by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is thus, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If this is not so, reset the medicine on the wound or the medicine has not worked, until your workings are even, and your eyes are set in place;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a cotton molliet in a poultice until the harsh corrosions are soothed, after curing the wound of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it be healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And it is necessary for you to take great care with your work by great diligence so that there is no neglect in the medicine of the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then recommence the medicine on that wound which is softened by the proper paper, thus as you have done before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure until it be healthy.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and that is the form of the leaf of dead myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and in smallness, and according to that be your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and let it not deviate from the right path for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor nod its head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	afterwards apply a cotton wool moistened with the juice of a pear or the milk of a peach on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	afterwards heat the cautery which is thus:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped at the head like the form of a hollow pen, together with which it is the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, it should be pointed from one part of the head to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but anyway, this which is shaped is of no value for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing on the fistula it is uncovered, and one removes the putridity, and the dryness.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and it is closed, if it opens, and one removes the false bottom;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after placing the hot iron on the cauterized area, and holding your hand on the cauterizing iron at the part of the nail where it meets the eye, so that your hand does not make a fool;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cauterizing iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If this does not work, then recommence the cauterizing iron once more, and if you are not a master of it, leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after I put on a cotton molliet in a poultice, and cure the ointment of the desiccative until it is healthy, and if forty days pass without it being healthy, then I put on medicine against corrosive ulcers so that the bone may be uncovered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and let him rest according to what he needs in his chamber.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a type of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Then make a fistula, and bend the limb;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after putting in the incision, I insert a subtle CAM (instrument) according to where it is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and they make a quantity of an ounce of lead;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand or instrument firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the melted lead does not run to his eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye a cotton wad soaked in egg whites or in water;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the melted lead thus forms the shape of a fistula, and the healthy part marvelously regains its health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then one must administer poultices to the nave, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is necessary for its own site.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks with what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not profit, then you should use a small cautery tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And apply it hastily to those cavities as far as life comes forth;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing the limb of corrosion until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gullet
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it has made putridity and rot and is inflamed and becomes fistulous;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit at all:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you have cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the iron tip comes to the front of it, and where the rear of the hand;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do thus one or two times, after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until it be healthy;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it doesn't work, then put the patient's head in a healthy position.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heating the cautery whose form will come thus afterwards in such a way that you put a chain over the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After lifting your hand and recommencing the cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After filling the patient's mouth with salty water, and holding it for an hour and then blowing fiercely.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the gums are softened restrained, and the moisture corrupts the scab.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or glass, and medical treatments are of no value, then it is necessary to use cautery according to the two methods.
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and burning cauterization and fire cauterization.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Burning cauterization is such that you hold a burning iron in a holder of iron or copper;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and dip it in burning bull's fire, and place it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that it puts a cold flame and cotton in burning frost, and place on the aching tooth, and place on the hot iron as far as the fire reaches the decay of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauterization with fire is such that you hold a iron rod or copper, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After burning with fire cautery, because of this the wound forms a crust that way afterwards, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand so long as the cautery cools down.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be alleviated that same day or the next day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good warm water in the impression of that cautery, and then he spits it out forcibly.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of a good cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a good cautery on the part that you want, and according to what you are able.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the burn:
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of flux and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn with fire cautery, because afterwards it forms a crust, and it has two openings for the fumes to exit from the cautery on the other part.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is most needed, until it reaches the root of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it be for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put on a cotton cloth soaked in butter until the discharge is eliminated;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing, anoint the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the chain:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When moisture accumulates on the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with dissolving medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	after you do cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not cauterize with a hot iron but rather a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the fire cautery, apply another cautery to the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" because we have the shape in front.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal the limb as we have said before, so that it may be healthy.
de la toust	of the thumb
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all the diseases of the chest are from cold and moist vapors, and the patients have no fever nor cough, and it is a chronic disease, then apply two cauteries to the strength in their veins.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery between the nipples.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle" according to the shape that has been mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, apply cautery by pricking to the entire cautery that is called "points" because the shape is thus before in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the hairs grow just up to XXX, or thereabouts.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After healing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are lighter cauterizations, because you make them in three places at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Then let the patient turn onto his back and onto his side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then lift the heart that is within the little finger of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has two nerves where it is in the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart as much as it pierces just up to the side, and there would come the figure of three cauteries assembled with four cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason, cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, because the figures of cauterization are six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tendon, and it is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And often is applied on this same nerve because it has eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	Then put on the cautery, pricking the burned area with a needle;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After having put the patient at rest, do not touch the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little things happen, then do cautery on the thick part of the cautery nail, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed again, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach coldness and much moisture occur until it affects his complexion, and multiple cathartics are given to him, and accustomed methods of cure do not profit, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back, and stretches out his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From these, afterwards make three fire cauterizations in the hollow of the thigh according to the quantity of a finger, with each entire cauterization being at an angle, and there should be space between one and another so they are not joined together when they form a triangle.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauterization be so profound that it reaches the two parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see a large cauterization in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will have fear of this cauterization, let him cauterize by pricking and signing on the stomach at that point according to the quantity that you see of an inch.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then the cauterizer applies all the cauterization which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, until it be healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver suffers from cold and moisture and great windiness, so that it is far removed from its natural complexion through excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does not profit him, if it is necessary that the patient be anointed on his ulcer;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and make three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, below the hypochondries, where the humor or the parts of the omere come;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and let there be a space between each cauterization the width of a finger;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauterizations be two fingers' length from the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on the entire cauterization;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let it be burned as much as the middle of the heart, and let the patient stand upright on their feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then let him lean, and stretch out his legs, and lift his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and that is the posture:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you want to, then cauterize these cauteries of the cuticular, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn the whole heart, for you would make it drier than the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come near the bowel, for the heart is very subtle there, and one should beware of seeing;
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess on the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too excessively strong;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if he is in a bandage, he feels foreign pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment affects the mirrors, it is necessary that the patient be warned about his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then sign where the abscess or swelling is, and then heat the cautery that is similar to the reason, from which it is the shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery as much as the veins are burnt, and approach just to the siphac, until the pores are completely purified;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment, according to the treatment of the humors, until he is healthy;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not suitable that anyone use this cautery unless he who has studied for a long time in the art of medicine, and whose hands these diseases have corrected many times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then it can hardly work, and yet it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make multiple cauteries at the roots of aristology, and in such a manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of aristology as long as you can find it, the largest one possible, and let it be dry, and let it also be as thick and as long as your fingers.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and grind it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize with a cautery between the shoulder blade and the neck, and apply small cauteries a little downward on the part that is beneath the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and apply cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a little.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and apply a cautery in the thigh, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on both sides of the thigh, opposite the cautery that is between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press with your hand, but rather make an opening as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some old men said that no one uses fire cautery similar to a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and thus the pain flees, as we have said in the aposteme of the foolish fever.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the spleen
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said as divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they perform three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Since it is a manner that you make three cauterizations, or four, in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the foolish fever that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on all the cauterizations, and let the patient be warned to lie on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the heart which is near the mouse, or where the stitches of the patient come from the left, and let the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After they burn the two nerves as much as the heart is perceived from the other side, and then they will make three incisions with the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that, if you cauterize the entire cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has been obtained by lengthy tension, and this is more than the other cures mentioned beforehand.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Fire cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the manner that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the bowels, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the pis.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauteries be well close to the thickness of a finger.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cautery open for a long time to allow for putrid matter to flow out, and do not stop the treatment of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be assembled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have placed before demonstrating;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is placed here before us.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of citrine water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and the anular;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply in the fontanelle, lest it would force out the bitter humor, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	Afterwards, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cuticular.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be of a length, one beneath the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries on for a long time without removing them, so that the water may issue forth.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatment of other treatments that we have said.
de la menoison	of the swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When a belly problem comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by ways of treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong virtue, if you do the great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before, or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and 4 cauteries around the subtle bowel for all subtle cautery, and 3 cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abounding and the patient suffering, make him a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each rib, and two small cauteries on the stomach beneath the great one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all, if you do cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	On the spine of the back, which is all deformed below the shoulder blade, and slightly in a triangle shape, and I apply fire cautery on the nodule that is there.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that the stomach is chilled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face swell, then one applies a great fire cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the fire cautery of the clave;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the fire cautery remain on for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the limb so that it becomes healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you touch the scar, heat up the fire cautery that seems to rasp, and then apply it all burned onto the touched scar.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and leave your hand so long as the fire cautery reaches the birth of the vein, from which the blood flows out.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much of the scar, cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of eye problems as long as they are healthy;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it will have even greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure a surgical procedure or an operation, which we will describe in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and casts putrid and corrupt moisture, if you prove all of it under a subtle tent, and beware that you know all of the tent how deep it has penetrated.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery that seems to be a razor, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tension is entered, and recommence the cautery as long as the corrupted and rotten body parts are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of their need.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and guard against burning the nerves that are affected, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, so guard against these evils, and do not make those false fires that are in the charned flesh, and think that it is not almost pierced.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after treating the flesh as long as it is healthy, and if the flesh is healed, and the materials are removed at length of time, then know that the flesh is entirely healthy.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the materials are not removed, it means that the joints are twisted, and the bones are corrupted at the source;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus like one of those which we will direct to its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to the roots, and from great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization on the roots from one side and another at the clavicle cauterization which we mentioned before.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will bring greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make cauterization on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cauterization should be as long as our thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and have them cauterize the back, where they will need an assistant;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cautery iron be formed according to the aforementioned shape.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception for that reason, and the flowers are corrupted and their endings delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, they feel great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to perform three cauteries around the belly, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and they will cauterize the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cautery iron be shaped, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the moist viscous humors descend to the hollow of the thigh, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring them together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the joints of the division are visible, so it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the box of the hip according to the cautery similar to a circle, and mark in front of the joint within the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cauteries are such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of the large olivary, and let the cauteries be as profound as all the veins.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until he is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	from the pain of the ankle
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the box of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment is not effective, and the disease is ancient:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary to purge the patient of thick, foul humors of fetid pills or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After the fire cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of doing cautery is according to two manners:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	it is to know that it assembles burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the surface of the thigh three triangular cauteries according to this form, and it makes good depth and greatness, and has between each cauterization a space the thickness of a finger, and so the cauteries are olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes one makes a cauterization in the middle on the head of the thigh, because there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, it is cauterized at the circular cauterization that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a manner that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces of the heart should be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And that is the manner in which they do it for sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach as far as the knee or as far as the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it reaches the thigh and leg, have two fire cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds them, and three fire cauteries above the ankle, on the left side a little.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery be cuticular, and let the spaces of the heart be burned;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes of the foot or near there, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if it is necessary, have them do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, have them do a fire cautery at the cuticular or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery so much that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient more great nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have undergone cauterization on the thigh, and they left it so long that the leg became completely swollen, and the foot as well, and was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a flux of belly which led him to death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, perform cauterization on one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men said about the cautery of the thigh, that it is in this manner, make the iron thus sharp and be at the tip as big as a thumb's nail, or a little less, and be by inserting and be from one insertion to another spacing out the quantity of a ninth of an inch.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the insertions be above two fingers' breadth, and let them also be like knots, and have the iron handle well made;
et c’est li forme:	and that is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is totally red hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the affected thigh's boil, and turn it on the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and let it cauterize once, and then remove the cautery and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of joint so that it be healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery for fear of his regard, and we see few who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and yet these are good cauteries, which can soothe, and there where they are applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The burning cauteries of medicine are so that you make the instrument at a stretch between the margins of the door, and it is either of iron or copper with a long handle, and in its height it has two points, and each has the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After put on the box of the hip to the ailing person lying on his healthy side, and then place your hand much on the box of the hip.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After the hand is placed between the two circles of warm water which has been heated by fire in a small pot, and let it stay for an hour of gentle heat, and the patient suffers from chill and numbness.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it is true that he finds biting pain as if from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the biting pains have passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the warm water of sweet dew, and let it stay thus for three days, and apply a poultice so that what is black from the burn may be removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it stay three days until the pus flows out in a stream;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and that would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds, so that they may be healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that holds warm water according to what you have done in the wound just so;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and it is the manner of warm water, and I have written it in a treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take equal parts of alkaline and living chalk, as much of one as of the other, and crush them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small opening to be made so that the tip of a scalpel can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put on top of that pot another well-plumbed pot, and put on alkaline and chalk and warm water above, until there is a duo of powders underneath which you will have well prepared in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it sit until it descends into warm water and reaches the well-plumbed pot, then take all that water, and pour it over chalk and alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very warm and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauterizations of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it does other works like fires, and if there are other medicines where one cauterizes well the thigh thus as thesis and honey and alkaline and soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us about a cure where one man was cured of the pain in his hainche and sciatic vein, and he limped greatly, and said that there was no other cure, and that he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he was bathed as it is taught afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And thus in this manner you should take the green fresh and dry litargire, and crush it much with a little fat, and apply it to the thigh and to the knee and to the leg where the pain lies, and the relief.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and let it be for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the bitterness.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then have him enter a warm bath so that his body is slightly relaxed, and have him enter bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be healthy.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines, unless it's after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with hot iron, it helps much;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it should be done by making the cauteries in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take a linen cloth and the warmth of old oil, and apply it to the fossa that is between the thumb of the foot and the other called fascia.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry hot iron, and heating it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and applying it to the loin, and leaving it there until it is extinguished;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do it again thus, and do not cease from doing thus until you think by sense that it comes just to the thigh, and that the pain is ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cautery is called "cautery of the vein".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar matter expanded cold, none of these appearances is worthy of cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after that the patient is void of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, there where the pain holds, three lines signed with an inch, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can suffer.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the claveable cautery of the middle finger according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a constricted arm when they get up, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the posterior spine of the back and in the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	When the fire cautery burns each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, if you cauterize around the spine with a piercing fire cautery in two or three lines, and the points are close to one another.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After healing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply fire cautery in curvature which is in a spasmodic nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pains of joints are caused by moisture that is spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the physician calls "podagre" properly, and when it is from cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make the mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the olive oil cautery be according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make fire cautery at all the fire cautery that one calls a "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make three or four cauteries on each knee, with all the olive oil cautery;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have a more skillful hand, then do more, but do not hold your hand for too long, only as much as the thickness of the skin can be burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and back, administer the cautery that we described in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the finger joints two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if it remains a point of pain in two places, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come just as cuts or just as swellings, cauterize each part, and make good governance for the patient and prepare medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good government and you purge bad blood, he will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of this face
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a fracture comes from anger, and the veins descend to the ankle and it is new, then it is necessary that when you want to cure the vein, it does not harm that one day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things that loosen the belly, so that the threads descend from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold his arm as long as the vein is repaired, and you reset it with your fingers, and mark from below the fracture on the bone of the thumb, and at all one sign that is similar to half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery to the form that it is
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is clear and it casts off unhealthy things.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bulbs to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the ministers hold their hand on it so that they do not return backwards;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs of the patient, and put beneath him a cushion and a sheet on the thighs, and another on the foot which holds his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then put the cautery on the sign at all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then recommence again another time until you reach just to the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and take care subtly that the bulb does not slip when you perform the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And you know that when you do not approach the bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterers of children be subtle according to the measure of their years, and of great men also great according to their measure.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, heal the limb with a gentle cauterization so that the numbness is lifted;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after healing other limbs so that it is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well cicatrized;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the boils do not burst when he gets up to go to his chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, have a well-made crutch presented to him, and use it for 40 other days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great a replenishment of drinking and eating, and of too high a temperature.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he makes this instruction, he will be entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will tell about the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When roots grow into other abdomens and are conjoined, and you see that they do not grow further, then have the fire cautery made according to their quantity, and be careful with the third heat of heart.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that one should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the level of the inch and make a line according to the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized claw-like [instrument].
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more moderate.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to a member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine is of no value, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twisting and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healthy from the first cautery, it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	by this name, recommend another cautery on top of that, for it is customary that it should be moved to the nearest member, because it is necessary that you make the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of messelry
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The massages are often aided by cautery with great help, and likewise the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flux and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	You cannot see that it should be cauterized, take heed because the disease is at the beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the entire patient, then make five cauteries on the chief.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I am the new head towards the forehead at the end of the veins;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and it is behind the two horns, and it derives from the little hammer;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and it leaves so much in your hand that the cauteries come right up to the bone, and as much as the crusts burst forth if the vapors of the great humors can issue forth;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the mixture is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it appears manifestly, if it is necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or head, and one cauterizes on the nose, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one on the chest and another on the sides, and two on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and it is on the joints, and it is on the tender flesh, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and be careful with the nerves that are on the last layer of skin calculating, so you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never make a cauterization on the bone of the thumb, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more you do cauterization, the more it does harm, and it hurts instead of helping;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient feels no pain from the cauterization if it is done as the healthy person would feel it, because the body is already almost entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, treat the wound with flour dust several times with honey and other treatments until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes into a member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should make cauterizations on the member according to the size and smallness of the member;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cautery be a little inserted between the skin of the arm;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wounds so that they are healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And often one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if it is relieved of the inflammation;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in no way should one interfere with it unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	about ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is enveloped, and the engines of medicine are of no value, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the skin of the arm, until the whiteness is relieved, and its color is changed.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then heal with flour of veatches and of lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of the colon and blood of the almond tree, each a part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be entirely wrapped together, and let it be tied with a bandage, and let it be elevated to the level where it will be healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a cancer appears at the beginning, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with a cautery that resembles a circle, entirely around the tumor.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And always the wise men say that one should perform cauterization also at the middle of the channel of the sore;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and always it does not seem to me good, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted to avoid it happening anytime;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and more rightfully it is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the superfluity that it does or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you hasten to amputate:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then you cauterize around the area of small pricks, pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards let it be so.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it hastens to worsen.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you want to pierce all around the cautery, then heat the cautery of copper, which is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this illness called "adubelati" so that the cauteries have pierced the heart, and be such the cauteries that the patient feels relief in some manner that the course of the disease is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards, treat until it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a withering of the members, for it withers the members just as the rust consumes the dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer from cauterization together with fire, then heat up the small and large cauters gently, according to what is suitable for the patient or where the disease is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	afterwards cauterize all parts so that you extract all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that everything which is corrupted may be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and put on the cauterized places a soothing balm made with oil as long as the burning of the fire is removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of swollen limbs producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then recommence the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted limbs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this mangy condition was never cured by medicine except in the case of fire cauterization.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but every way fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment of the ague medicine in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take the quantity that you have in hand.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	for pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Often it happens that the feet are paralyzed by a weakness which is called "cold" according to our intention, and it is a large faulty swelling that affects the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations of this disease are in two manners.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to know fire cauterization and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is that you heat I heated cautery as if it were a hollow pen, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can hold the nail on all sides, and that it has subtle margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	after heating everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the source of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it stay thus for three days until it begins to make a purulent discharge;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a plaster of wild savages' herbs boiled with oil, and let the plaster stay on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound of burning by anointing so much that it be sound.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are turned around by defective limbs, and many times it happens in the hands and in the feet, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization of warm water;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in such a manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a cane of iron or of steel, or a pointed instrument, and place it on the nail and the ankle, that is to say for removing warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the cane on it so that it presses all around, then I put a little warm water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches to the root of the nail, and thus find the warm water way deep into the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the warm water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it thus, and it will uproot everything to its very roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus you do one after another, as long as you stretch those who are in the body, then heal the wounds that cause shame.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling hand
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some shudder with cold or nerves, or from a four-day fever or another, if it is necessary that you apply three or four fire cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one on the foot, and one on the stomach for an olive-tree cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if you leave the shuddering, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Several times they appear through skin defects, or pus-filled boils, which come from corrupted large masses.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	if it is necessary at first when they appear that one applies fire cauterization on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle fire cautery made from the wood of myrtle, so that the point is seized by the fire, or with the root of a long aristologe, or with a lentricular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow worse from then on, but are freed from the superfluities that come from them, and are healthy.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there occur great disturbances of blood in the artery that is connected to the wound that comes from the outer skin, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And always when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly so that the blood is appeased beneath your finger, and does not issue forth anymore;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then apply to the fire the olive oil cauterizers, many small and large ones, as long as they are completely red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take I, or large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply the cauterizer to that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterizer there until the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease from doing one after the other as long as the wound is still inflamed;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not irritate the nerve which is affected, and that another evil does not come upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when the wound does not close over the artery, one cannot easily restrain it meantime as the artery is large, so it is not by one of the four methods that we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	either by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have the power to restrain blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and be bound and restrained immediately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the stanching of the bleeding wound tightly with strips or by placing heated things on it, or similar things, does not benefit if they do not do it little by little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then one must put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind well until it is restrained above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the finger, but the millet of the cold water should be very cold so that the blood is congealed and thickened and stopped.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make an inquiry beforehand about those things which he has need of cauterizations and of medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have said in the first chapter that every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or with burning medicines, and the materials and causes and instruments and forms of cauterizations.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed that chapter of the loins just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method by which one finds more lightly what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one of the cauteries, and because of this it requires more caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	Where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many sorts of people come to cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such who aggravate their illness so that they die easily because of the weakness that they find in their disease, and the greatness of their evil.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and of these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these there is one who gives you his sense, and says:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am beware";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is despising.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those things of which you are certain, and of which you can have taken and lost.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your ailments so that health may be converted to salvation;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of longevity.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have arranged this chapter in divisions, according to what is before or the chapter of cauteries, which I have divided from head to feet, because you will find it easier to master.
dou chief plein d’aigue	of a head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Be aware that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the midwife holds the child's head too strongly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and it never comes from a cause that is known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this illness except in children, and nearly all those whom I have seen hasten to death;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and therefore it seems to me that I should leave the work in part to other cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not support its own weight;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so great that it caused death, and this moisture is gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the operations are such that when moisture is between the heart and the bone, and abscesses are small, you make a large incision in the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it be as long as two of us, so that the moisture flows;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see there the form of the spatula-shaped:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the sutures of the head overturned in each part, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	if it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this method:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	Afterwards, hold the incisions with dressings and powders, and I put in wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then dislocate it, and treat the wound with tents and with ointments, and let the head be held steady, and give to the patient dry meat in moderation, little by little, until the member is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incising is to examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it is never in front;
aucune fois derrier;	never behind;
aucune fois en destre;	never to the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then there where the abscess opens, and the gathering of the water, and you do it according to what you can about it;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let flow a little blood, if the patient dies from the corruption of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of swelling
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens that a patient has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is chronic, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with fire, which one copes with by burning the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is necessary then, when you cut the veins, that the patient makes his head recoil;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after you rub the skin with a rough cloth so much that the arteries appear, then the patient stretches out his neck under the whole cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look where the veins beat, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and few are responded.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the veins of the enclosure, then cut one and the other with a sharp instrument of two edges, as long as the vein leads up to the bone, and it should be done by the width of the top of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting also as .ij. two at the traverse.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then mark the enclosure and cut up to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and it is necessary to put blood flow there if it is six inches, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone a little below the symbaphyphus, if you cut what produces abscesses here and there, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of the emigrant
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old emigrant comes, and has a catarrh, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and the old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medicinal cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries of the temples and their cauterizations, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs on their temples grow back, and pays attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is hardly restored except in some homes where they are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is restored, then the patient stretches out their neck from some wraps, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and raises the area of warm water so that the artery opens manifestly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula in the form of which it is here:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with pincers, and separate well the membranes that are beneath each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the anvil, then cover that part according to the quantity of the two hips.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For she is not cupped, if they do not jump the blood all at once.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And let flow three fluids from the sixth [degree of] heat, just up to the third;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you ligate it in two layers of a strong double silk thread, which will not obstruct before the closure of the wound, and will stop the flowing of blood;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then remove the superfluity which is between the two ligatures at that hour, and then, if you see fit, if you cauterize with a cellular cautery up to the bone as long as the head is coped;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is the moderate work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauterizations are helpful in ending the moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	because it is of greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the hole with much cotton and places well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when you dislodge them, they must be treated with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until they are healthy;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and without touching the artery so much as you can, if you hasten to cop the wound by cauterizing, or you fill the void with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is staunchied;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this remedy, put your finger on the wound so that the blood is congealed, and raise the wound with cold water until the bleeding stops, and hold it steady as it is necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and that which is more deadly and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this trenchant cauterizing iron of two edges, but the trenchant edge should be well sharpened to avoid staying too long over the wound.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And you should have between the two cauteries a space of a thumb's width, and then when you have signed on both sides, and you measure the iron rod fiery hot until it comes just to the bone, and touches the vein on both sides.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they should be separated between the two heads because it is not possible to cauterize everything all at once.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are flowing down due to veins that are on the top of the head from the fire, and it does not benefit from a cure by medicine that one makes, and you see the face of the patient becoming red, and feel at the forehead an abnormal gait as if from tremors.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and the eyes are tired and moist so that the hair of the papers is fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, if you have need of this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they call the old "contused cure", and it is that you make three incisions on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, with hairs growing from the front, then make three equal cuts according to the length of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the incisions be thus, like two dots on the forehead going downwards to the nose, and the others two on the sides near the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on the sides near the papers;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and align your hand with the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across the joints;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and prepare a piece of sponge and much of cloth to suck out the blood, then apply the spatula acute at two parts where it is the shape;
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	of the incision that goes to the temple up to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape off all the crust that is between the two fissures to the entire width of the syphac which is on the bone, then make another section of the mean incision just up to the other second, and then extract this spatula-like thing.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellare", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not very sharp, and that's its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge sloping towards the airy flesh of the heart, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and the joint as far as it reaches the middle wound.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut off the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as far as the incision is continuous up to what opens on the bone, and then make another section in the mean fissure up to the other defect.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the blood equally, and press out the bone for the blood taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on soaked cloths in wine and oil and in vinegar, and beware that apostemes do not develop there.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day, release the ligature, and I will show you a great remedy of hot water, then the treatment with royal balsam ointment with rose oil, and other treatments that one uses to cure wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyelids
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When a vein is inflamed from habitual abuse, and you see the eyes clouded and small, and dimming the sight, and blistered skin.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and where the head is in the front of a painful ache, and the patient is exhausted;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you know through these accidents that those matters and this cathartic do not come from many veins, and the mournful cure that it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a great incision in the forehead, and another so large I do not dare.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and so let the incision be just up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and stretch out your hand near the roots of the temples that move to the brain;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, suck up all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the two lips of the fissure and put in much cotton, and tighten with a linen bandage;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then apply warm dressings made of wine and oil, and beware of a sudden aposteme.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is numb, it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with exciting remedies that cause flesh to grow.
En teil maniere:	In such a manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colofinum, and make an emplaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it to these wounds to grow flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the inflammation of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into the ears is one of four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	either grains, or beast, or rock from the mine or similar things like iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seeds, such as jasse, fava beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing things such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls in the pierced ear or another manner of thing that does not adjust to the ear, nor grows in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, distill some little droplet of violet oil or sesame oil, then it facilitates extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make the condition stern, and stop up the nostrils when the sternness comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and stop up the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times relief comes through this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not bring relief, then facilitate the extraction with subtle pinches, because that is the method:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it brings relief through pinches, that's good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then facilitate the extraction with a subtle onion-like small doublure;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not bring relief through that, then make a pipe of copper and insert the head of the pipe into the ear or piercing hole strongly, and stop up what is around the pipe with wax so that air cannot enter with the pipe;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then the fiery cauterization is formed, because many times it comes forth as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come forth in this manner, then take glue from that and take the eyes, and put in some instrument which is at a point to make it, and put a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue onto the stone or whatever that may be, and cauterize strongly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not burst forth from all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut open the ear thus so that an abscess falls into a vein, and spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of the cutting is that you first make the patient sane from the cephalic disease, and extract some blood according to its virtue, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where it depends on the fat or lean;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the wound be as crescent-shaped as a moon, until you reach the stone, then suck according to your power, and hastily bring it to your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the treatment so that it be healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer an extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot exit, then administer the spatula with subtle thrust according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do it when you think that the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that falls into the ear, it is necessary that the patient use the sternuation of conditi first, and fill the ear with a lot of cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him sit on that shoulder where the ache is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	Let her walk for this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if not, take many pieces according to the length of your thumb, tender and light, and heat them a little at the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put the patient a hole or perforation in their ear, and sew it with thread from another piece of skin, and attach it to another skin on the skin that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease from making this skin to skin as long as the water issues forth entirely, and thus it will be entirely free;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, take the joint, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head is seized by fire until the most tender joint is burnt;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then remake another part of other joints until the water issues forth entirely, as we have said in the skin.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar things, treat it thus as we have said in the division;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large body that one can feel it, then prepare an extraction with pincers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the thing most easy to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the section and where you treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit, if it is necessary that you expose the ear to sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if they open no worms, if they draw them out as subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the cane of where it is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck formally all the way to the cane;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this as often as all the worms are seen.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, stop up the cane with cotton as I have said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not sweat as we have said, administer gentle distillations that the ancients have experienced in the treatment of wounds, and you will find them or treat with distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear with all this instrument, because it is the method as you see;
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And whether of silver or copper tubes below at the small holes, and above them pour to distill;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press within the distillation to the copper instrument well-made for that, and if you see take the receiver and envelop it around the point where the cotton comes;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then you pour your oil or your juice, and that which you take of your medicines in the reed, and the reed is in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then put everything into the receiver with all the cotton, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled or flows out of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and let the patient sense it internally, and so are the distillations; I heat them up with fire in this way, as one distills into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the inflammation of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have some perforation in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to men through swelling of wounds, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these swellings come sometimes deep into the ear, if one cannot see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes it happens that I thoroughly clean out the perforation, and then I see it very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes deep inside, if one cannot see it, is of grievous sanitation in many conditions, and in that case it is necessary that you place the ear of the patient in the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look within:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the apparent obstruction, if the work is entirely of this spatula-like material from which it is formed:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting on both sides all along, so that it does not numb the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the obstruction is of flesh born or growing from the ear, if you hold it with subtle pincers, and gently touch, until that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the suppurations are deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle, light razor and heat it slightly by fire, then place it at the root of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the obstruction where the patient feels great pain in the ear, touch lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and apply it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a tent and apply it with red oil, and sprinkle on powdered glass powder.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you apply the tent and remove another infected tent made of rosed oil and wax, so that the inflammation may be removed;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if a flow of blood comes, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that eliminate the flow of blood which are or treat with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	These are the thorns that come from papers of eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and cut with a spatula of their roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on the place a glassy ointment rubbed.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without decay, so the cautery of subtle lenticular fire, and the cauteryizer after the incision is worth more;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times they repair, since nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauteryized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the crust
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often times there come in papers of the eyes certain things that appear rough in their form and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take heed when the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Make the donor of the large wound, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cover it without piercing a little the skin, do not harm anything to the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the wound is large, sew it up with a suture, and treat it until it is healthy.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	And if it is small, do not use force, for the joints will soon restore themselves and become strong again.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the vein is descending from the bottom of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and stretch the vein to a pinch, and press on one side and the other.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is separated by incision, it does not hurt at all;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the vein is pressed, lift the salty water with oil, and heal the place of those who are injured so much that the patient may be healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fatness that is injured in the papers above, and this happens more to young children, and hurts much their eyes, and they come to cathars at dawn, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hurry to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and for this they lie down on their faces immediately, and sleep on them, and their papers beneath their eyebrows are moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered over the exinach which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand against your fingers and feel the muscle tension between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the treatment is that the patient puts his head on a healthy side;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains excess of each part, then place it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands on one side and the other, so that the excess is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture a cutting spatula making a cut of a large width, and it should not be larger than the wound one makes when opening a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin deep enough so that you reach the excess;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many dispositions comes excess from the cut, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Remove then all at once a piece of torn cloth between your two fingers at the defect, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and beware that you do not thrust into the fissure, that you do not reach the entire spatula up to the eye, that you do not bruise it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the instrument does not open at the beginning of the fissure, increase it a little bit so that the fissure opens more easily as it appears;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then extract it as we have said, then wrap in a clean cloth and in water, and put on the limb, and strain with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who break their own skin and put it on to corrupt the moisture that is retained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal until it be healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there comes a hot abscess to the limb, then heal with emplasters soothing until it be healthy.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When in papers (skin) unnatural hairs are thrust aside from their natural place, and are enveloped, they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the skin and albumin, so much that it is the cause of destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and it is the treatment in four ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	Here is the translation:
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the patient's head upright, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is converted, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	see if not, if you push a needle all along the thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be along the margin of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and pull the thread above all the way to the paper, and turn it to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make an incision below the paper, below the aligned hairs, all the way to the spatula-like instrument, from the large lancet up to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, like the leaf of myrtle, and however it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into toes.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if you take a part which is mastered, one copes with a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make a whole spatula on the two lines that you have signed, and start from the great large lancet just up to small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let it be one of the incisions near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the two angles of the horn, then scrape everything;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then assemble the two lips at a seam of a needle with all the subtle thread of flax, and suck out the blood, and make a bond of the superfluity of the threads on the two eyebrows at all kinds of gluey things, if you want to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if it doesn't work, if you don't have a cure, then leave the seam and the threads until three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	Then cure the wound without tight constricting things, for the skin revives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the constricting is murderous (as the ancients said), and it's work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another manner:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you shape the skin into a figure like the leaf of myrtle, as we have related, at three ounces of ointment according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply this to those who have small equal forces in harmony with the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the bandages, and the thing is not even, take a needle or it has one thread, and put it in the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and put another thread from the large larder, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble between your two threads evenly;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin upon which you have signed, as we have related, then assemble the two lips of the wound by constricting, and cure until it is healthy;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a gentle and similar soothing application;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and often it happens that the hairs of the parchment are converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if it is necessary, you should use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of wounds is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you should convert the parchment and make them inside according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two subtle threads as long as the parchment and the width of the spatula-like instrument is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut as two heads of two parts or where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble one and the other subtly above what overhangs from the parchment of the eye, and pull out the two wounds of the two parts forcibly;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it thus for some days, and the skin that is constricted will become numb and weak, and porous, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it delays, if the scalp adheres to the bone, then cure it until it is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer puncture the hair;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and it is the shape of the two canals that you will make according to this design, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and insert a soft and subtle silk thread;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width long;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then order in the hunt another subtle thread of briefly twisted silk, and tie the two heads of thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the patient's head in your healthy one;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and let it be under the sun so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and minor work, then put the needle at the root of the hair that is affected, and make it pierce the papyrus hastily until you draw it above the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then extract the hair up to the root, and put into the root that hair, if there is one or two or three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then extract your hand so that the hairs come out from the root into the papyrus with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the root is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then pull the root down to the bottom of the thread that you had ordained there, so that the root comes out from the hole above and you see it by the sight of the eye;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then you should pull out the splint and the thread, and close the eye and let it close for two or three days, until the hair grows back into its place and the flesh grows over it.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hairs are short, accompany the long hair of the natural whiskers, and be lifted with that which you let it be, until it is elongated and then set free.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the burning of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease called "aleacrati" or the pus comes into the eye, if there are two manners of it:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of operating on it is that you open the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put in threads of linen, and leave it until it is healthy;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not suitable that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrain.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	Because you do this, if the illness returns worse than the first.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I observe things that are soothing, like fenugrec.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose-water or ague, and flaxseed, being cooked, and anointments of dyaquilon founded on none of the oils, and I enveloped a tent, and the cure of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your cure is that you take heed that it does not sink according to the form it had before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said are not stronger than the treatments of this illness, so it does not relapse according to the form it had before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is beneath, which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the operation is that you take a needle, in which there is a double thread, and prick the flesh, and make it pierce from the left arm to the right, so that the threads come together at the head of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the flesh is above all the bristle, and the scalpel has a large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the skin returns according to what it should be, that's good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take the rasp and put it in the crack, and turn the skin, and make two cracks or sew up inside the skin;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the heads of the two cracks at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and make one angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is just like the shape of a letter which has not "I griesche";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are thus arranged beneath, of what follows the skin, then adjust the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of flax;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the treatment of what we have said about softening medicines, and of tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a crack or a stitch or a cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain crack underneath the hairs of the papers, and according to what is presented here.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then dissect between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to engineer everything so that they can make it return to its natural shape;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the same patients, according to what they need in terms of work and instruments in various arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	You burn with the application of paper.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this joint has stuck together in such a way that the paper on top is glued with the white of the egg, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it up high.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and hold the pincers, as long as you cut what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too pointed nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula is too pointed and does not blister the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision be, where you carefully strip away the assembled one, lightly, so that the skin regains its natural shape;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it is healthy throughout the assembled one, and never irritates the sharp salty eye, and raises the sweet water, and the collarbone;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then put between the skin and the eye a linen bandage, and place on the eye a moistened flaxen cloth in abundance of egg whites;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days, use sweet collars and similar things as long as it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail is according to two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is nervous and resembles ivory, and another that is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture, which when touched by iron and pressed by the pincers, it cannot be moved.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and one and the other resemble the great artery, and grows little by little until it covers all vision and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in a healthy position, then he opens his eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lifts the skin with your hand, then bends the finger into small doubles, and holds it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and insert the hair of a horse, or of a calf, or of an ox, and pull it strongly.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle a little and fix it in the finger, and pass it through the entire needle, and tie the finger with a thread and hold it above, and strip all the hair from the side of the finger which joins the vein and the artery at the head, then cut the remaining part into the root of the artery with subtle and small forces, and let the natural flesh or artery, so that by the incision, the body of the veins does not become accustomed.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and many times the nail is pierced at the ankle only, and at the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the scab forms a whole spatula full of pus where it is in its form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And take care that the spatula does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the prune is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour into the oil a little of bruised sage, and make a poultice from litharge, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal those things which he needs as long as it takes to be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the ankle joints cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medications;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and grow thus as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, then open the oil of the patient, and take the lighter spatula a little gently according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And you raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes at no point and the reason is pressed, then distill from your mouth into the hollow colier made of litharge and red colier, and wipe the eye just to the other hour;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then recommend the other treatment according to this same work, until it is completely restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the wound, as an abscess grows, then lance it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the work as before, so that it may be healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the skin is painful from the tears at night in the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it on the onion, and cover one part and not entirely, so that tears do not come there;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill into the hollow red colier made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the nail
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	The eyes of some men never saw the red flesh, and uncover the plumule and hold steady on the papyrus and turn to the deformed, and resemble a rose of balusters;
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the operations are such that the patient puts his head in a healthy position, then he opens his eyes, and collects all that flesh as convenient signs to this, and holds it with strength;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then grasp the first flesh, and take all grasping to the healer just until the end, and beware that you do not blink an eye during the operation;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be a gentle spatula which we have said in the incision of the ankle and with small forces because one breaks the sebum, thus like the form afterwards this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is broken, then apply the oil of broiet or you distill red coliere and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a piece of cotton with water of eggs, so that it be assured against hot aposteme;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if he delays nothing, and the blood flows back up, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with soothing things that reduce the hot abscess;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work as soon as he is healthy, and thus make sure that the flesh is adjusted in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But always it is necessary that you adjust the treatment of each weak eye according to the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the accidental way, in work of iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works as long as you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	There are certain red veins that are covered on the eye, and they obstruct the vision with their work and totally blind the eye sometimes.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is necessary therefore at first that you examine the eye, in which it is, it is false, and there is no other illness besides the cataract.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then operates on it in such a manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to place his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around the anointed area according to his wisdom, and let the anointed areas be subtle and doubly so according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be of one circle by degrees in the body according to this form.
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then one coils the veins subtly, and drains the blood hourly after another, until you see the removal of the veins that are farthest from the eye.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and beware that you do not blind the eye at the points of the spatumiles, and perform this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not omit more than those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red color to corrupt what is morbidly swollen below.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are not able to coil all that in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of soothing things to calm the pain of the eyes, and let it be for some days until the pain is calmed and assured against hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is before, as long as it is healthy.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and it's the shape of the fractures:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The mirror is called "arissati" a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat it with cautery and with ardant medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if it is engendered in it that you make an incision on the abscess, there where it must be softened, and draw out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if you take out all the instrument of which it is the shape;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "asper chief", and it should be made of iron indeed at the chief part, and should be pointed like a file as it is in the present shape:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that this corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the place of effective medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the joints are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the bowel is swollen, and it remains thus for 40 days, and it does not recover and is not abscessed, and bad accidents happen, since he is healthy;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	if this does not work, then there is no other technique than to bring the fistula back to the perforated nostril according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you discover the bone for the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when they are discovered if they take the forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the fistula should be attenuated until the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone of the armier, and stretch out your hand from the eye to the pouce, then turn the entire forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by that which comes in if he holds his hand on his nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh is born and endures the joints, thus goes the matter to the nail;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes open fully everywhere, and it does not come to disturb the nose, nor diminishment, so it is necessary that you read the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the vein, then put ventouses or heated iron without piercing to suck, then put on the eye a linen made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and apply a plaster made of bandages and drapery.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the drapery is that you take drapery quite soft, and fold each in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes have need of.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	Then hold back by means of a sturdy bandage above, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck out the infection without causing an ulcer.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then remove the cupping glasses and hold the eye steady day and night, and if the veins are numb, it is necessary that you extract much.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then remove the vein after the day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, it is good.
se ce non;	If not.
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you reapply the plaster and the bandages and the vein and the cupping glasses until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing of the woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When ruptures occur in the web-like membrane, then open, and come forth from papers as if it were grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	Then if you see the web-like membrane, the operations are such that you put a needle in the root of the affected part below, then put another needle where it has a double thread from the part of the arm.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and have them pierced, and leave the first needle according to the disposition;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then thread the double filament and tie a part of the tube around, and hold it well, then extract the needle and put it on the other moistened eye in abundance of egg whites;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it be until the threads coagulate with the egg white, then heal the eye with comforting things until the wound is healthy;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and often the wound is held back by the egg white, each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if you pierce with a subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and correct the moist albuginean humor and descends to the eyes, and enters thereat once;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is not other than a swelling that gathers in the eye, resembling a vein descending, and it is not a real vein.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the appearance of the swelling is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat and straight, then take the head between your hands in two parts, and move it so that you see the swelling come above to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then be steady, and do not descend or be disordered in the light, and see the patient's things as they are accustomed to.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is a vein, and the descents of the swelling are not apparent as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	if you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and touch on the cornual web at the point where the conjunctiva continues with the cornual web and the crown, until the swelling subsides.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is dislocated, then distill into the sharp warm water mixed with honey, or warm or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another treatment until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	from the tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have here the similarities of the sharp waters in the division, and that which it needs to pierce;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It needs that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and hold the healthy oil firmly and strongly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper of the oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a ray in that whitish part of the eye at the lower minor eyelid, then apply the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and turn your hand so it pierces into the whitish part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measurement of the way of almagda be at the forefront of the measurement of the spaces which are from the prunelle up to the end of the blackness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horn-like tissue, and then place the instrument next to where the water is, then press it down one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation:
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting a little, and if the water rises by the second way, place the strength with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, then extract almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put back into water a small piece of gemstone, and remove it from the eye within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by default the eyes stupefied or soiled in oil rosat and in abundance of egg, and bind with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those who are of our tension, put on common broth with abundance of egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond eye cannot enter into the oil by its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And pierce then the conjunctiva slightly, and do not go too deeply in, but make the subtle layer, then inject alum water, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient the doorkeeper approaching, in which he sleeps on his back in the darkened room;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be deprived of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then disengage him from that darkened house, and test his vision, and make him see no things, and then put him back in the bandage until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not suitable that you do this in the hour of treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water mounts hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	because abscesses often come, that you delay the ointment before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is appeased, if you delay the dressing and put on his face an ointment to cover for some days, and be then in that darkened house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then exit from the house little by little, and it converts into its cases;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from the IRArch, who told us that in his country they made a certain almagda powder, which attracts water, but I never saw any of it in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see the way;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and be properly prepared:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head is of gold in this same subtlety, and the handle in four angles alike.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No time is born or engendered various diverse characters, because there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there is such that has an enhanced charm of fixed color, and if it has a soft charm of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that gift of those charms which is soft and not enhanced, you should make the patient sit between your hands against the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open their nostrils, and cast the onion at those charms, and pull out the fierce roots;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then take what you have in your hands to support the subtle spatula on one side, as much as you know that this charm is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that cannot be coped, open everything to the subtle and lightweight instruments, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and without swelling above, or abscess burning, if you drain it as it should be done;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it's malignant abscess, hasten and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned away, then apply either oil or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the oil does not work, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not pass as it should, know that there is new flesh growing in the bone above, where the instruments cannot come to cut;
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then it is necessary that you put a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and sew with our hands, and have between each stitch of space a doit or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's head at the end of the thread in his nose to purify, and draw it out odorous as it comes through the nose into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times they do thus to the infant at birth, and it is a light thing for one who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out one after the other while being gentle as we are with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the nostrils have purified that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian oil, and put it back into the nose as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this for three days or more, until the oils corrode all that remains of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put or apply a compress of pounded herbs for some days until it is healthy, and if it needs medicine treatment, use it;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the shape of the instrument for cleansing the head, where they distill oils and medicines or apply them;
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And whether of silver or copper, similar to an overturned lamp, like a candle, and the conduits thus;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, make a closed candle, and let the instruments be plain for cleansing the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and hold the handle to the head to keep it steady when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a tumor grows on the head which is called "telul", and it increases and becomes large again, until it is visible to behold;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and therefore it is necessary that you cut them off at the beginning, and remove all the tissue, then apply the cautery or the burning medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you delay in covering it until it is large, take warning if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron for it is an enchanted abscess, because when you cover it sometimes, great evil comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that it can be fully covered, then look at the patient and cover their sense with fear, and heal the place with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cauterized and burned
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these cartilaginous passages, it profits little, because in some homes.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is necessary therefore that you take care of it when it has come to nothing, if you look at the wound whether it is fresh in all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then adjust the two lips to a seam, then heal until it is healthy;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their heart until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a seam, and restrain, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and burn incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on the poultices a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it be until it sticks by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method of the bruise is that you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the bruise of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with a thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	Many men have inwardly had abscesses in their lips, similar to grains of vezes, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and split on each nut, and take them as pincers and cut into each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the oil after the incision of vitriol broth, until the wound is stained;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then apply the oil of iris, and heal the limb of dry things as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times a swelling appears on the gums which the old people call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	it is necessary that you hold it back with bandages, and cut to its root, and let the blood or fluid flow;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then apply on the limb a glassy paste, or other powders that restrain and dry;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that which returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut a second time, and cauterize:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return again after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	the filthy ones
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they gather at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and often the teeth turn black and yellowish and decayed, so that the rot reaches the gums, and are the foul-smelling teeth;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and their head be in your lap, and take out the teeth or the scabs that appear, so that nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus make of the blackness and the greenish color, and of the yellowness and other stains, so that they be eradicated;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then start again from the second day and the third, until you have everything removed;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth have need of various forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that one extracts between the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others are prepared with you equipped.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of his pain that you delay to treat as much as you can, for this must not be done in a hurry.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a very high substance just up to then so that one has no excuse to rush.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained from treating, it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth that hurts.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and believes it is in a healthy tooth, and makes the good tooth decay.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and never does the pain depart from him for that, as much as the bad one is extracted, because we have already wanted to do it to these healthy ones.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on every side, strongly to guard the gum from all parts.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then place your fingers or subtle pincers at the first little by little, so that it is well loosened, then firmly fix the pincers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the head of the patient be stable between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, then take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did previously.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the teeth are broken and worn away, it is necessary that you fill them with cloths, there where the holes are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you hold it subtly at the roots, so that it does not break while holding.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you do well to be wary that you do not break it, and leave a part remaining, and reattach to the patient through the evil of the root, which causes greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act like the ignorant surgeon, who through their haste and hardness often break the instrument, and do not amend what we have related.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but often come instead through the examination of this great disease for the roots that they remove, or for the instrument that they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is decayed, if you wash the affected area with wine or with vinegar and with saliva;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and we stop the flow of blood that comes, which often happens, if you apply the area with powdered vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if it does not help, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of instruments, where one must extract the teeth first, should be long and pointed and have large handles, so they do not slip when you pull the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large limbs so that they do not bend in the shaft, and they should be of well-made iron, and they should be held by muscles to keep steady.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the pulling, it is necessary that you place on the affected area cotton soaked in bitter wine I or II, as long as the gums are numb, then you apply the clamps called "algefri", from which the head seems to be like a beak of a swan;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and let them be made thus like a file and it is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and apply the instrument called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break easily, and if its root goes up through this, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, then help with all the instruments, because of which the forms come here afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has many grooves, from which comes the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are before in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large forceps, from which comes the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of these dense instruments are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument for the diversity of wounds; and it does not break at all in the cartilage or in other bones, or it becomes porous, if they seek those instruments that they need, which I have told you, and help with the gestures, from which this form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let it be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip, but then it can hold and ostrute;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore to the bone the suitable medications, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, then take all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural course, and its shape is ugly, and especially in women with small mouths, then it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not born after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot make them straight or file:
adonques lou raie;	then the root;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is attached with the tooth, then take this instrument which has the shape, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be of iron pointed in a hook:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the instrument takes a little and little in the jaws for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, thus take the file of one part file as it is the form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file with which one makes the needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and apply a gentle touch with thumb and finger slowly, so they do not move until it takes hold;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then apply a gentle pressure at the end without any raspiness, and if the teeth are too sharp and it bites the tongue, you must file the asperity until it is even, so it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth are locked, whether by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on them so they chew, and you treat them with constricting medications, and that does not work;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	you must restrain it with a golden thread, for the silver wire turns green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thin thread be not too large nor too small, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you want to realign the teeth, take the thread and double strand between the two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you feel strongly just up to the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then recommence the covering just up to the part where you started, and hold your hand subtly and strongly, until it does not move at all;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then seize the heads of the thread with pincers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the threads break, hold it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it stays and serves thus all its tension, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the adjustment of the two healthy teeth, and of the two jaws, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, if you reset it in its place, little by little, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not interfere with it, for one is not skilled and suffers, and never makes the shape of a tooth of ivory, and puts it in its place where the defect is, and holds it steady as we have said, and it stays and serves thus long tension.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of burning the ligature of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never is it a natural bond that comes from under the tongue or naturally, which grows thus;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accidental wound soothing;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy one, and lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	Then cut the nervous cord as wide, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it's a sudden injury, if you cut the uncinate and cut wide the cord.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and beware that the wound does not go too deep in front, because of the artery which is underneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done it, lift the lever of hot water and of hay, or of cold water, then put underneath the tongue a tent of linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and touch the patient's gum every night, so that the jaws cannot close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if a flow of blood comes, then put on the lever a glassy powdered vitriol;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize it with a slow-cautery, which is good for that;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then the treatment of another treatment until he is healthy,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see a flesh-colored or black or hard spot, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it declines to a blister, and there is moisture, so he applies an onion, and makes a subtle spatula, and delivers from one part and another;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the blood does not come to your work, so put on a warm vitriol ointment until it is stained, then return to your work as much as you can draw out;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the skin of the axle and of the seat, and the treatment of other treatments until he is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes there come within the throat ulcers which are called "godath", and they are properly called the II abscesses, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, take heed:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If it is a hard abscess with little sensation and of foul color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the flow of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it be until it becomes ripe, and then you will divide it, lest it break apart by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color around, and the root is subtle, then have the instrument ready to cut, but first make sure the abscess has cooled down and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be in your healthy hand, and hold their mouth and grasp the surgeon's hands between theirs, and press the tongue below all the instruments, so that it is in the correct position;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or of subtle iron, just like our cautery instruments:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	Can't you press the tongue against this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and fix it in the amber, and pull it out strongly above what you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and draw something from the tiles with, then match it to the instrument, because of its shape, which seems like a kind of force;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all ways the head is curved, and one end to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument at hand, then cover it with a bandage, because of its shape.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let it be cutting on one side, and named on the other side;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have matched one of the embers, then match the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and hot and gentle, and if there is a flow of blood, then gargle the patient with hot water, or scorching pomegranate seeds that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is staunched;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then let the wound heal until it is healthy;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and often other abscesses do not grow in the throat besides the two glands, if they collect there just like the two glands adhere.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, it is to know the small abscess of little sense;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and it had almost closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was obstructed, and she couldn't eat or drink, and would have died if she remained like that for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so elevated that it had almost put two threads through the two openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened then, and made an incision in one of the tonsils, then the flux of blood flowed out, and a large portion of pus came with it.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I made another incision in the other perforation of the nose, and I opened the mouth and pressed on the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After applying fire cautery to these abscesses, and cutting into a part of it, only a little blood comes out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and then the throat constrictions of the woman were relaxed, and now she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscesses grew back again, and filled the void that I had emptied, so much that it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I tricked it and cauterized it within the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	then I waited for a while without growing worse.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I departed from those regions, and did not know what God would do about them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the humors descend to the vein, and it is swollen and long, then it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is grossly swollen and round, it is called "uve".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all, and you see that the painful abscess is alleviated, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cauterize it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one that is round and assembled and is not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is blood-red or of dark color or black, then it is necessary that you avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, by its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then prick the onion in the eye, and draw it thus, and cauterize with one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two handles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not remove more flesh than the excess which is beyond the natural terms;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut more, it grieves at the voice, and at the speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the II wounds, and cure until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear about cutting, it is necessary that you use skill in the cautery of the senses for fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and piercing.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts their head in your healthy hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cauterization, and confirms with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using the handling of this instrument, from which there is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And have on the head a lock of hair or where one puts the medicine, like the stirrings of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the vein;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient should be leaning on their side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth with the medicine inside, so it doesn't descend to the throat, and the blister;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then put your hand on all the medicine and press it onto the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see the nausea and the stingings of the medicine are appeased;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and envelop it in some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument on all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the eye;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and apply again after three or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have mastery of reapplying the cauterization of the medicine, reapply it, and after cauterizing the eye, clean around the eye with cotton wrapped in cloth, and remove what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be risen with cold water, and let it be cured of gagging as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision, not that the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	it is cured of fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put it there, and make it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and in the pot have an instrument that is arranged in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be placed in the patient's mouth as long as the vapors rise to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the vapors cease, until the eye dries, and be careful that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, for many things can happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make a more fierce fire than at the decline of an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not available, take a cane and place a small piece of egg white in the chief's mouth, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the egg white does not let the hot vapors bother the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether for healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times one finds at the throat an os or a fish bone, or something else;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing clearly.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what does not appear to you and is stuck in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit thus, so that the food is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance if they throw up the bitter thing through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	where the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and the sponge filament sticks to it, and then it is swallowed;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the place, if it sticks, and then it will pass through;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out of what we have said, take the instrument of puncture according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest everything goes awry, and do not push the bone within;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows when the thing is bitter;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If you cut below, or if you draw blood for all the instruments equally, as long as it is drawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the hollow of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No medicine is suitable for the patient, as I said in the division, through the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not benefit him, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, then press his tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the wound, if it draws to all small unevenness, or subtle tenaciousness that are worth it.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it's not worth it, take a twisted hair, and put it in the patient's throat, then put or remove the twisted hair with the hot iron, and make it breathe.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you touch the patient's water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full view of the water of cold agua, and open the mouth, and let it glide in sensing, and move it to his hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if the patient soon feels the water, he recovers.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if he does not recover as we have said, then fumigate the patient with assafetida at the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the urine.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall beneath less pressure.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot or it has visible coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in this pierced one is the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then you throw in the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes just to the saneness;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the saneness will fall now, and if it does not fall, then recommence the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then the liver is treated so that it is strengthened by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument is where one treats the blood, if it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tongs for entering into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has resemblance to a beak of a sign, and it has roughness of a file, if what it takes, it cannot release;
et vez ci la forme:	and see the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the lancets for the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own resemblance, and because of what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is through the eyes where they are at the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the body are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce, as long as the bowel is tender according to its accomplishment;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if there are such that one must pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses that are on the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets them be until they are ripe inside, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Where the abscess is on the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it becomes ripe, then it will not hurt the principal member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	where it is at the foundation, if you pierce it in this way so that it becomes ripe;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not suitable for you to pierce an abscess without complete digestion, unless it is at the foundation, so that it does not putrefy within, and becomes long and narrow, and an fistula forms;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the hour of perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure from fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the soft debate and adjustment of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make a seat for the perforation or more dependent on the boil, and where it opens muscles;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the perforation be far from the long course of the body, and if the boils are on the hands or feet, or in joints and veins and arteries, and in all equal parts where there is no obstruction.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases where they complain, according to the condition of that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the flesh, it is necessary that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you make a hole in front of that, it will be lengthwise along the body from his vein, and it is full of much foul matter;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps they harden the lips and the deep wounds of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you bring together small boils, small perforations;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large boils, large perforations, and many divisions according to the likeness of the greatness of the boil;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if there are such boils where it is necessary to shave the head, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has thus come to pass like I envelop, and is numbed, so one must do thus as one does for bruises:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are those that one covers thus like the leaf of myrtle, thus like abscesses of the loins;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, thus like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce them, so do not drain all the pus at that hour, but drain a part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then staunch the abscess up to the next day, then do not drain anything there afterwards;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Do this often, many times a day, so that the wound heals entirely;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	especially if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men in decline.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Because the desperate often die suddenly with the issue of the bowel, which by chance kills the patient, and you do not perceive it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Examine therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, examine the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a plain ulcer, apply a dressing made of linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it is necessary that you put a dressing on each one so that they do not touch each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have caught in the abscess a piece of soft skin, and you have shaved around it, it is necessary that you fill it with much cotton or dressing of linen threads without moisture, and leave it just until the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the bone, and the treatment of the joint so it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if you remove blood that has accumulated in your work, if you apply a cold and easy treatment, and wrap it with a cloth, and put a soothing ointment on the affected area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the blood persists stubbornly, it is necessary to govern and treat it with the powders I mentioned in my book, and if it's a matter of winter, and the nervousness of the joints or abscesses is very great, then you should apply warm tents and soft drapings soaked in wine and hot oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it's in summer, and the joints are weak, then you should apply soft drapings soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then dissolve the abscess and the swelling and treat it, as it is necessary, so that it becomes healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	where you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see here this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Where the skin of the head becomes small abscesses, and there are ways for us that are in tiles, just like the joinery of a joint, and many have similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some fatty ones and such that have moisture as well as pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if there are some that are hard and piercing to the cutter, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the cutting are that you test all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", because the form comes from this, whatever it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, one feels it by putting above the hollow of the loin.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is evacuated, one clears away everything leaving no skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately when one leaves nothing.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then insert cotton in Egyptian unguent, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, in water and in wine, and fill the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and that will corrode what has remained of the pus.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then reinsert the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains of the pus.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the wound of puncture at the suitable time, so it may be healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscesses hold in a thick nut, then scrape according to this form, from afar off;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and you cut the onions, and scrub the entire surface, and apply all your cures to draw forth the humor from the spot where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery does the opposite, then do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And thus do with the abscess if it is piercing, and from cutting and from curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the piercing abscess and the moist one, it is less serious, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if there are none of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and it was an abscess that I touched on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess as hard as a dry stone, rough and white, and it could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had touched any of them, one would have done as much harm as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other apostemes coming to the head, because those that come to the head of children and roots of the ears, one should open so it be entirely dependent on the top, in order to issue the bowel;
et les cure si com il covient.	and the treatment if it is necessary.
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and beneath the shoulder blades, and in the loins, and sometimes they come to other parts or limbs, and are many, and are entangled one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly in its side, as the nut and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one then which you see of good disposition in the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, and changes in each part and is not at all hard as the veins of the neck nor in the artery, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if it is necessary that you cut through from above, and scrape the skin of each part, and stretch the two lips of the heart as oncines, if you are in need of it, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and prick little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not let the scalpel slip, lest it cuts, and do not cut too far ahead, so you do not touch what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, then put into the wound a vitriol ointment, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to pus.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then seek with your finger if there remain small scraps, if you cut and mend them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is in the root of the vein a large vein, it is not necessary that you cut that vein at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall by itself, without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then apply the old cotton wool dressing in an Egyptian application, then the treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire abscess, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more superfluity due to the greatness of the abscess.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you understand how to cope with the root of it, and draw out the pus, and sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrophulae that hold a surplus, pierce where it appears to me;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce thus as that mentioned beforehand, depending on it, then I will treat the tendons with dressing and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains from the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, then the treatment with dressing gives a pleasant warmth, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The old ones said and spoke of the cutting into the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the scripture of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have a squint, it is necessary that the crack in the throat called "epiglottis" be examined;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one must not help with that, because all the veins and the forearm of the patient are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the loins.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it beneath three circles or four a small traverse cut between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the siphac, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if it is consonant to the section of the epiglottis that there is no spot of flesh, and the vessels are long enough to inquire.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to the entire tonsil, then cut the cartilage as far as it reaches the uvula.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and clear the blood vessels, if you do not see anything, and then cut the siphac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is shown by the section of the two veins of the shin where they burst forth by the limb that is broken, and by the defect of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound open a part.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed in which one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the whole heart, and sew everything beneath the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Avoid doing this just as much as the throat is entirely stuffed, and the patient is judged to death, and the default lacks the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is protected from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this reason the old man commands to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it will pass in three days or four; And then they command to cauterize the wound and cure, until it is cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took the cautery, and she applied it to her throat, and burned part of the sinews of her arm;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the surgeon, and I found her almost dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered, nor did a vein lead to the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until she was healthy;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and I did not have against the young woman except that her voice was hoarse, and she recovered afterwards to her usual state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I thought that in the cutting of the epiglottis there was no danger.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the colour of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natures, and accidents;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	where there is no natural obstacle.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to two manners, one of which appears as a thick swelling to us, and the other manner appears as an abscess that comes from our artery;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not seem to be working with fiery strength except in the small area, and it tries and searches everywhere for the internal obstruction:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus as I do not find a thick swelling, nor does it penetrate to any vein, if it is a cope, if one copes the nous, and draws out all its filth, if there is none;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everywhere, and heal it as it is fitting, until it be perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many kinds of nous, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and thus it appears that I die from all the difference that is between not and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that issue is heat and fever holding, as long as the inflammation has passed, and it accomplishes the purification;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then replace the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the noontide there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains the syrup, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus as a jaundice, and becomes thick;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to the second similarities, whether gray, or moist, and many colors are thus as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth [remedy], that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into the abscesses of our noumen is that you take or make more moist the place where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, until you feel that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the greatness of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entromesis, and take heed of this, that it will burst forth suddenly.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moist humor flows, whatever its color may be, thus they make them as I have said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the entromesis, if moist humor does not come, know that it is thick, thus they make a cross-shaped incision, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and examine the seam where it lies, so you may treat it healthily with the nouement;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot treat it healthily, then treat it by pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if something remains, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it remains a little, and the wound does not grieve you, then fill the wound with certain corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and apply soothing things to the hot abscess, and heal with other cures until it is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and it is great to us, if you cut the two lips of the wound, and the cure of those who cause char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and it is good to apply a dressing of vitriol ointment, and leave it two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to cauterizing what was deadened from the tumor.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Behold here the forms of inward-turned instruments, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three squares which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, for encircling the abscesses of a fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are like the needles whose points one burns to make them yellow, and they are of citrus iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced in inserting the cores of fistulas;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the cauteries are very similar, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are cauteries that have two cores of three kinds also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and there are cauteries that have three cores, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and there are cauteries that have two cores, and cauteries with only one core, and they are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is sharp to those who make them, and of such there are some that do not cut except from one side, whence we scrape the nails, because one does not touch the vein nor the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these instruments are the lancets put in handles, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and we do not use them more than in the flesh of calves, as with legs, and arms, and limbs, and in similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes we make another small instrument, resembling the scrapers of fists, according to this form, with which one stains blood;
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and set it at no time on the joint that heals by joining of veins, and as arteries, and no time is found according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never inflame the limbs of certain men when they begin to be corrupted, as much as they seem to be feminine;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain lazy and inflamed, and whoever wants to cure them, if it is necessary to follow this form of this line, from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply the medicine by charming the wound, then bring together the two lips of the wound to suture, and treat until it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and the limb becomes weak and feeble, and is amazed by its greatness as if it were a woman's, if it is placed in two pairs of ribs above, through two similar fissures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and prepare what we have said about dressings and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, so that it may be healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the deterioration of blood, it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it be until it eats away the remainder and the fat, then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the seats are kinds of hard scrofulas or they have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who hold moisture must be treated according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire abscess is empty, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and heal by applying ointment to make it healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, do as we have said for wounds of scrofula, and if the wound is open, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is damaged, and the skin that is above it becomes swollen, then often abscesses occur, and similarly it happens to the inflamed and abscessed vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one recognizes thus that it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel an imbalance;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is because of the vein, it seems that the veins are deficiently appearing;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to touch this abscess, and likewise when it is under the arms and in the angles and in the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to choose the iron cure, and he who is at the head must choose also, and in he who is inflated with artery wind make above the skin of the loin;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then open the size of the incisions, and beautifully separate the artery from the tiles, until it is discovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then put beneath it a needle, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then prick the spot which is between the two lines of an intro-missive so that the blood flows out, and be free from the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment that starts to swell, so that the swelling subsides;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound of the joint, arriving at it, so that it be healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is by the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess from all the skin, then push the needle beneath the spot that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then lay on the abscess, as I have told you, or the swelling of one of the two parts as two heads of a double thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then you reinsert another needle under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut into the abscess until the superfluid comes out, then cut into the superfluity of the tumor and let go what is tied;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a dressing made of millet in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come into the artery and into the vein, they come to be abscesses as nerves when they are irritated, or by too great effort, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And it happens more often in the joints and the two toes where there are joints, and this is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body, but beneath the skin;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and it must be well aligned on all parts, and does not go ahead or back, nor above nor below, and the one that is in joints should not be touched by iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	perhaps they will encounter contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or forehead, make the skin on the spatula-like.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, then hold it with a tight grip, and cut into its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, then suspend it from the anvil, and scrape, then bone and assemble the wound to the suture, and cure until it be healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of thick hanging lips
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	It often happens in the belly and not another part of the body, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by the resemblance to mushrooms, and has subtle roots, and large lumps.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are some small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw that there was a man who had it II or wind in his belly which were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and they had little roots, and they were split apart, and they immediately corroded from moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces heavy, and the other 6, and the work of the incision shows that if you examine the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is pale and moist with subtle roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if you cut into the spatula-shaped instrument, and thus they are in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when the surgeon often encounters too great a flow of blood, and if the senses fail you, then hasten to give a cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the iron, take a well-made thread, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then hold back, and do not cease from holding back the flow of pus until it touches the joint, and divide it by means of skillful work;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, so to avoid cutting into the belly, but you can well cut most of it, then cauterize so it does not return;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then heal the wound, and beware that you do not cut into the tissue that is of faulty colour and poor sensation and weak regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted abscess later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of a wound or fracture of the syphac, and it is on the belly and in some of the buttons, as it happens in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the rupture of the syphac and by the outlet of the belly, then the colour of the abscess is similar to the colour of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it swells up, and then returns, and perhaps by chance it is severe, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it's a light thing, and it appears clearly when you press on it with your hand, it doesn't resist at all.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, it appears by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are such that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It must be that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in this chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to stretch out his intestine, and be straightened entirely, then sign from the inside all around the bowel.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	Then instruct him to sit comfortably between your hands, then go around the place where you signed to the entire spatium, then stretch half of the abscess above to the entire great groin.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then bind it with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk firmly, and thus we will give the patient absolute comfort.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then open most of the abscess that is extended on the thread, and you should indicate with your finger, and examine the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find the true threads taken from the thread, if it dissolves, and examines the intestine at the bottom of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you find the bowel, if it takes on the groin, and cuts away the redundancy.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery does contrary, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take two needles, and you should thread two strong threads, and thread the two needles into what you have done in a cross so that you make them pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then stretch the abscess into four layers on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it will take, and kill the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you hold the cup when it is subtly warmed and purified, then treat what needs to be treated, and shave around the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb of what needs to be treated, and sew up the limb.
dou chancre	swollen tumor
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken in the division about the similarities of cancer, and how one must operate with medicines, and how one must avoid the treatment with iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and we say that cancer takes root in the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when cancer is in the limb or where one can reach it if it is like cancer which is in the breasts, and in the hips, and in similar places, and one must remove all of it when it is at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and ancient, it does not seem that you should approach it, for one cannot heal any of it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	I have seen none of them heal before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the works, when it is in place or where you can open it, as we have said, is that you cleanse the patient of black bile.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him healthier if he has shown fullness, then prepare the patient in a good place to do the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then cut your incisions or gangrene, and shave all parts, and bone all parts without leaving anything.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or anything, and if the flowing blood makes you counter against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding is stanched.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with another healing as long as it is healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and in what manner the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is suddenly inflamed;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch with iron in these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	it is to know, tympany and hypochondria, for it is mortal things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you treat this symptom of dropsy which is called "inflamed" from treatments, and the cure does not benefit, if you see that the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as a tumor and solution of belly and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if one must not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient has strong virtue, and they have no other illness besides dropsy only, and it is not too young nor too old, then you must work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	raise the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly at the navel, bending the water to the lowest part of the pis, then take the spatula-like spine according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be two incisions.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	At a point, and in no way should it be so introduced that it can come just up to the intestine when one thrusts it in, and it cannot be blocked.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look if the dropsy is turning towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you make an incision above the swelling, three fingers' width directly above the navel;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to the liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the swelling, three fingers' width;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to the spleen, then make it on the right, and it is not necessary that the patient's gaze falls upon the incision, lest the superfluous fluids run to that weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the swelling, and lift your hand to the entire spatium between the skin and the fascia, just as in scraping out the quantity of an ounce or an eighth;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then prick the sharp point as far as the spatula comes to the empty space, and it is the level of the water, then draw it back, and it pushes this instrument from which it is the shape.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a subtle silver tube, and it is of copper or lighter arching, and has a small hole at the bottom.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and where it is shaped on one side, three holes;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on another side, and one on the other;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and it is the head cut like a pen, and it is the shape of the incision where the writers sharpen the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top above is the scalpel, so that when the instruments come to the water, they descend now onto the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty it then by half or a third part, because if you empty more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the relaxation of his spirit of the arm, or he falls into a swoon, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the dispositions of the strength of the patient signify, and his pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is held back now by the heart which stops up the passage that is on the skin, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then reinsert the instrument the other way, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw water in a small quantity;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do it no way, and guard yourself from flowing too much but only a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt on the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the grave or sandy heat, and by very sweet or bath and in the sun, and abstain from drinking.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the care of drying medicines as long as it is healthy, and to cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No time is born a child who does not have holes in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If you want to pierce them so that they do not have to perceive everything in the very subtle spatium, according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or pierce with a subtle instrument, and tie it up and hold it thus for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, let the closure be opened, and make him urinate, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance, you will not find a problem, because the urine that comes forth does not let it close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The place where the perforation is small, if it is medicated with a thick cloth of wool, as we have said, so it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the penis in their place are blighted, because none are born with the penis at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before they lift their rod up high.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come up to the marrow, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on their back, then the head of the rod and the handle are equally sized like the width of a penny, so that the perforating instrument is in the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of the flow of blood that comes often, and if it happens, then stop what is bleeding blood, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times the abscess bursts on the rod, and there is an appearance of ugly flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and in it there are malignant and non-malignant ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	it is necessary that you take them to the subtle anointed one, and handle all the parts, then place on cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with diafinicon ointment until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of foul color and putrid, then you must apply fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have taken hold of it, and the white swelling is in a state of numbness, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary to remove the white swelling that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is sucked, then heal what is outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you cure it together, then the swelling of the limb is not assured that it may not be perceived, and blackening and corruption come to its limb and in that place.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it is necessary to remove all that which is black and corrupt, then place on the plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the scorched skin of grenate pomegranates and of veal, then cure with other cures until it be healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if a flow of blood comes, then apply the lunar cautery in this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauterizations thus aid in two dispositions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	it is to know, at the deterioration of blood, and to the corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you apply a tube of plum to the penis, and inject the patient with;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin is torn around the head of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it happens from a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a blunt instrument, so that the threads are disentangled and the head of the penis is freed on all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a spatula-like instrument around the head of the penis and the skin;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then separate it gently between the two, and I put a subtle layer of a cold ointment on the millstone, so that it does not become inflamed again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity as with other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	In every way when we make this work of our will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the greatest part of my masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around the thigh, and with force, and all at once;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if the skin is cut because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts on that above and delays that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Then the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the healing which is two days hence it is not assured of the point of the limb;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and in the healing of the ankle by chance the iron slips, and corrodes the work, and many times it grows so that they have no need of healing and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mending which is done with forces all the way to the thread of wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	Because when you press your hand, if you cut equally throughout, you feel it all tense;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but the thread should be well stretched around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the manner of the first operation is such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you do not force it to tie the thread around the penis too tightly, and then you make it move in all the ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then you make it stand between your hands straight, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand on the penis and blow or touch, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is in;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean well the ordure that is assembled there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below one pox to another ligament;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and you will hold it by the second finger on the pouch and on the index finger, and grasp between the two ligaments, then lift the cortex above hastily and draw the head of the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the remedy;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on it and on the powder I drizzle glue made from a half-cooked egg white, mixed with rose oil, good and fresh, and let it stay until the next day, and treat with another treatment until he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The shape of the bandages for the mundification is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two heads should be tender and piercing, and the heads should be as large as the equal joint of the hand:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The mistake in the mundification is when the heart within goes to the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then it is necessary that you stretch out to your finger, thus so that the humors make an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and equal balance, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, so hold it with a bandage, and then balance it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, so let it be until the abscesses are appeased, and scrape off lightly;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if you balance it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm it at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Heal then the limb of sudden wounds with powder, which we have said or treatise on powders, and if you balance double the measure of the outer, and it goes above, it will not harm at all.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	due to retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction of the kidney, or of congealed blood, or of a blow, or of a new wound, or of similar things, which we have spoken of in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine does not flow, and you see that the retention is due to the kidney which is hurt or compressed at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and they should place their feet on the back, and stretch out their belly from the upper part above the back, and the patient should strain to relieve himself as much as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constricted at the expression of the kidney above, because of which the urine flows;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer an extraction with all the instruments which are called "syringe", of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let it be of subtle silver threads light as a bird's feather;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let it be the length of a palm and a half, and subtly at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of extracting the urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head with a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut the excess of the wool and insert it just at the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist olive oil and water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod downwards towards the bowel;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then apply the syringe before it reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it reaching the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because of that which conducts or leads it astray.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread to the entire lane little by little, and the urine follows the lane, then it strays outside, and makes the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and continue with the syringe until the bladder is empty, and relieve the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the vein
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood or pus comes into the vein, where putrefaction is assembled, and you have seen to distill sharp points and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it has three punctures:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	Two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the veins are chosen because the short medicine is such that it stops well the erect penis without addition, if one can then draw out the moisture, and apply as much as necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see that your medicines are in the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and pull out the treating instrument which is inside;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you draw moisture to the joint, and then strongly rebend the drawing thread;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if you enter the moisture there, and it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and it is the subtle form of the catheter by which one catheterizes the bladder:
si est ci:	if it is so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or of copper, and it is the head higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below at the seat or the chains fall;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it that you want to catheterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts in the form of a twisted double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then put the head of the catheter in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming at once, until the patient feels that this moisture has just arrived at the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle on it, and pierce it around entirely.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then insert the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a beam, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as if you had done with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have previously stated in the division the methods of piercing, and the extraction of assembled medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and we have said the difference between the piercing in January as reins, and all the signs, and in what piercing one should operate by size;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the rod;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is in the bladder if it often happens to children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similarly to water in its subtlety;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it appears here and there, and rubs the patient's rod, and it bites many times, and then becomes stiff;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at much of these jumps the foundations;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and it is easy the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is much grievous in old people, and it is as gentle moisture, to those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and it is the cure easier for those who have a large stone, than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to clean the patient with a clyster, in order to expel all the bad humors that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often hinders one from questioning the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and make them lean forward and move downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and jumps out several times from the high place;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands are beneath his thighs, so that the vessel is entirely declining downward;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then the vein and touch inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall to the toucher of the whole, then anoint your right index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old, or your left finger, if the patient is young and accomplished;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and thrust it into its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then anoint the neck of the vessel;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press on with your finger, and thrust it to the depth where you want to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instruct the minister to press the vessel with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand hold the skin which is beneath the loins in the part where the cutting is done;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	Then I apply the spatula, which is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an incision between what is between the hip and the perineum, not in the middle but at the side of the left thigh;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight on the stone, and the two should be equally or at the foundation, and the cut of the traversing tree should be wide enough to pass through, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the press if the two that are at the foundation, so that they burst forth without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is a part of the stone where it has angles and margins:
si est griés a issir;	if it is difficult to remove;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is a part that is underneath, similar to a pebble, and rounded, whose removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	Where there are angles and margins, make the cut larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump, then you must stretch on the tendons which are like a thread at the head of the bone, to strongly stretch the stone so that it doesn't escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	where you apply underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small hole, and if the sense is disturbed, then stretch with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, then apply the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out forcibly, and the small ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, it needs to be operated on, and to make a bigger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For these things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	where he dies, or the urine comes back immediately because the bladder cannot hold it;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but you must exert yourself to treat, or to remove the tendons, so much that you treat them by pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put it on with a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or with oil and warm rose water and cold froid water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then restore the patient to their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage just until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, rub very well the joint with oil and water, then apply the ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses come in the wound and corrode, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that which holds back the urine, which is known in such a way that without passing with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	put forth your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrode the bladder, and putrefy;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of serum, and aid it in all the ways that you know, so that it may be healthy.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the openings that you cure, that you tie the two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the cure of what I say thus, that you often cut away, is an excuse for the cutting away by this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proved it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a rod of iron in this form and it is fixed at three angles in the thigh.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take the thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then push the iron into the rod gently, until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the iron in your hand on the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	If the urine comes immediately, then press your hand on what is remaining of the stone which is within the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is immediately broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this because of anything that is defective, if you fill the space beneath the stone and another above, then make the penis in the place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract it out, and release the ligament, and clear away the congealed blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until he is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It rarely happens that a stone is in the genitals of women, and if it happens at all, the treatment is grievous, and is defended against by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman well acquainted who uncovers her mirrors, especially when she is pregnant.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well acquainted in this hand craft;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth manner is that the skin of the woman is more in the forefront than the skin of the man, because it conceals doing deeper cutting, and there is great fear. And if you need to sew it up, then you must take a wise woman well acquainted, and prick the place on, and if you don't find one, at least ask for a subtle mirror.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and the present is a wise woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the craft, and she instructs that she do what you command her to do from the examination of the skin;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very well if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to thrust his finger or foundation and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if it is found, if it is stuck under his finger, and recommend that she thrusts her finger or with the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it gently from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft flesh, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move her finger on the stone or below, and let it be cut at the first small size;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then thrust the razor in the incision, if you feel the stone if it increases the wound so that the stone can be extracted further, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	It is to know, small and large and thin and swollen, long and round, and which have roots.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	you examine the symptoms to know the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the wound does not heal, then apply to the vivid broth a poultice, and hold it in place for an hour until the wound is cleansed.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is broken, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as tools for you to help in your operation.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the wound does not heal, and it is of the artery that is cut, then apply powder on the wound and hold with tourniquets and bandages, and do not restart this, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest by chance the patient may die.
puis cure la plaie.	then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are purified, then return to your work, until the stone is loose.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Rheum is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white flux, which is beneath the skin of the loins, that contains the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly on the web of the egg, if one believes that it is another eye;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it's the skin of the conjoined twin between the white "syfac" that we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and they did not have a small pouch.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this limb is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from a blow on the joints, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	where it is declining into a yellowish color, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is or white "syfac" that we have mentioned, then it's the swollen abscesses, a little long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own web, then it's the swollen abscesses with part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white membrane, then it feels very good;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you want to know the color of the moisture, it is tested by the entire introspection, because its form is thus before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the inner quarter, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then he places himself on his back, on a somewhat high thing, and puts many wraps of cloth under him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then he sits on his left, and instructs the minister to sit on his right, and stretches the rod to one of the two rib bones near the joints;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula-like instrument, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just up to the nail, and make the incision entirely straight in dividing the skin of the joints up to the white membrane, and scrape subtly according to his power;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then prick the swollen siphac plain with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put your onguines, and it is the siphac above;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the core of the joints, but only the siphac suffers;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	take all or in pieces the subtle part of his costal, that if you do not take it very wisely, the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the egg (vein) bursts for a tonsil, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the siphac;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then assemble the two leaves of the core of the joints to a crust, then cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the vein corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you ligate the vessels that are suspended, doubting the decay of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then cauterize the entire affected area, and extract the humor, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the wound is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	then cauterize the other part just as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wound a soft linen cloth anointed with rose oil;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put on top another soft linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and put over the two joints, and put above double layers of cloth, and bind it all together with a bandage that is according to this form;
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and fill them with linen fragments according to this likeness, and assemble them by sewing along the throat of the arms, and one of the heads takes hold at the base just up to the back, and the other at the part of the thigh;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two fingers on the two angels, and let the entire assembly of the restraint be in the loop of the arm;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and no time is it medicated with this remedy of cautery in the size of iron, and it is that you grasp the subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the thighs, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syphilis which contains the water is discovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that syphilis as onyx, and burn it with this subtle cautery hot iron:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And cut in all the ways that you can, until you extract everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and be careful that the iron does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more salvatory;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and beware of the deterioration of blood, and dread the operations of size;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if there is no thing that does against you, whether an abscess or a break in the blood or something else, if you cure what does against you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to attend to this work due to its horror, if you make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that the water is there, then seat the patient on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then prick the abscess in the part beneath all the spatula, and put the perforation at the length of two fingers from the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the wounds be wide, so that all the water flows out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let the remainder of the water flow out, then cure it until the wound is healthy;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and you should not let the white cloth issue forth the water in the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you apply a pen or instrument with which one treats the water of the hydropic, whose form is thus before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and enlarge the wound, and know that the water returns, and it is assembled after six months or within a year, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will spend their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease there is fear in many dispositions, because it seems to me that few are worth leaving;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses come to a crisis, and meanwhile are like boils;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive inflammation and fever, which spreads to the joints, or from a blow;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and does not find a point of pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance it is a grievous abscess, painful and piercing, and of bad color, and sometimes it comes from a blow on an artery, or from inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a blow on an artery, it is recognized by the warm disposition of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not seem to you that you touched it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	That which is made from inflammation of a vein is recognized by its disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers, and one can well make an estimate about it based on this similarity, and on other symptoms.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the cord of the joints, then place the egg white above, and rub the dough fiercely with a white cloth, and release the suspension from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already mixed with these new charms, then it is necessary that you extract the egg, and cut the cord.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is stuck to the cloth, or in that which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you release all that tension, and cut around completely.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, then it is necessary that you cut it all, and withdraw the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are completed, then apply the plaster of boiled linseed oil and wine, then heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	These are abscesses wrapped in a wrapping resembling a finger stall, with the softening of the joints, and the patient's grievance increases greatly when it worsens.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this illness is very similar to that which was before, and always we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then put the suspensory of the joints below your fingers, to all the vessels that are near the edge, and touch the masters, and stretch them out forcefully;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut with a sharp spatula widely through the place where the vessels are, until they are uncovered, and then scrape away from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert a needle with a double thread, and tie it to the first vein where the blood flow has come, and then tie it again to the other vein;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut them in a straight line, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heal the wound as with others or by putting a bandage, so that no vessel is injured that does not nourish one of the joints;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	because through this there comes no harm, and if all the veins are seen, then it is necessary to treat all the joints;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the veins, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of this face
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The happenings of this vein are through the section that comes out or goes back in, or the extension into the belly in the part of the gutters, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the joints;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this routing is either downwards or back in, or from the extension of it, and these two manners come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a heavy weight, and from similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension downwards, are that it happens little by little, in long tension, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is equal abscesses just as far as the peritoneum, because the systolic pressure presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the syrup, which causes sudden onset of pain, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and this is due to the issue from the intestine and the body being weakened by the syrup.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends beneath the circles with the intestine, and is retained inwardly, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments to fear, because they think they will escape it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the surgery is that you instruct the patient to reintroduce the intestine into their hand within the wound, if they can re-enter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be supported on their neck between your hands, and lift the hips;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the cord above, and sew up all the skin of the conjoined long wound;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the leaves of the waist uncinated according to what you have need to open the wound, and be such that the eyes can issue forth;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape off the systolic pressure that is beneath the skin of the conjoined wound, until the hard systolic pressure is uncovered on all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then put your right index finger into what follows the wound, into what is between the white systolic pressure that is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second systolic pressure, and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second systolic pressure;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then put the cotton on the right hand within the circle of the joints, and hold the white cloth above at your left hand, and lift the cotton to all the joints around the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to stretch the cotton upwards, and release what is behind the joint;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and seek with your fingers if there is a point of the intestine wrapped or hard white cloth, and if you do not find anything, then thrust it into the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle where there is a large thread made of X threads, and thrust it into the back part of the joint's cloth, which is behind the skin of the joints;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the cloth, which we have said is behind the skin of the joints, with a strong bond of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then envelop the heads of the veins, and bind them firmly in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter there, lest an abscess forms there.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the ligature according to the first ligature, a long way from that one, and after these two ligatures allow the surplus to flow which is below the heart of the joints, the greatness of a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and afterwards all the others according to the roundness that the egg produces;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the joints, as long as the saneness corrects, and the swelling, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then grind the millstone in oil, and put it in wounds, and I grind the ligature that we have spoken of.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the white skin cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of blood deterioration.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens many times, and leaves the ligature until it holds through itself.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays at the wound, so be it raised with warm water, and put on it what we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done as the branch which is near the vein, in such a way that you tie the veins, after cutting lightly underneath.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut into the middle, and treat the abscess with what opens, until the veins are cleared.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and opens the abscesses.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not descend into the intestines to the intestines, and if it descends, it is little, and repair all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always if it remains too long at this point, so the wound or ulcer suppurates, as much as the intestine descends;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the ulcer that is at the angles, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then becomes softened and inflames the eyes and opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and it is never cured by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient places his back between your hands, then takes the limb of the affected part inflamed from the large wound according to the quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the ulcer that is beneath the skin where it attaches, then take the branch and put it on the limb appearing from the ulcer;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press at the deepest part of the belly, then cut the two limbs appearing from the ulcer on the head of the branch, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the vein, and do not cover the point from which it emerges, nor does it stretch to another thing, just as I have made you understand in the treatment of the inflammation of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then heal by healing the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, if it is undamaged and cures the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The blood flow is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterizations are moved to this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times are softened the skins of the hips in some men, because the flesh that is within them is softened, and it is easy to see;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, that one makes the patient sit on his back, and covers the skin that is softened with natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring the two lips together at a seam, and if you see, first remove the excess of the softened skin at three seams or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cover between the seams, and heal it like the other wounds, until it is healthy, and sew the seam.
dou chastrement	two cauteries
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Be aware that I am forbidden from speaking about it in our law, and therefore it pleases me not to speak of it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary to make a fuss about it for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one of which is that the doctors know how to respond when asked and know the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often have experience of chastising certain beasts to help us, such as goat and sheep and cattle and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that chastisement is made according to two methods:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we make by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water, until the joint is softened and flexible;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them with your hand, until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the correction of wounds:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you hold the best, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie it with a suspensor, and cover each opening with a cup, when you have well scarified them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and let no pouch dwell under the syfac and the subtle syfac which is above the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this manner of correction is better than that which is done by attraction, because in attraction something of the joints often remains, which is why the best desires luxury;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then heal the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	of hernias
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphroditism is in two ways among men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is when between the two joints opens as if the figure of a woman's nature appears, or has hair, and sometimes the urine flows out.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the little finger as if a penis and two thighs.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the shoulder and of the groin is that you should cauterize all the adjacent areas, and treat them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of their thighs, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tendonitis
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	A tentigen is an adjacent area on the genital part, so much that it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it as big as a hand, and that's the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you touch the superficies of the tentigen with your hand or with onguents, and cauterize lightly;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deeply into the flesh, lest corrupted blood flows out, then treat with another treatment as long as it is healthy;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and at another sore that is born at the mouth of the marrow, and the abscess, and by chance it bursts forth, and it is according to the resemblance of a cowe, and for this reason the ancient ones called it "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
de erratique	of scarifying
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Here is the translation:
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural from birth, or happens by accident due to illness that comes about.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is through a displaced cartilage, or a subtle or thick douleur, and is made deep in the marrow, or in the ribs, or beneath, or as it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and hinder conception, and impede growth, and by chance cause flowers to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is through the examination of the ulcer.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the symptoms are nearly apparent, then examine with your fingers or on the radius.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is a subtle douleur, and it is near the liver, if you hurry, and turn it thus.
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then stretch out the two livers firmly, so that the subtle douleur is round, and is above the swelling.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take the lancet, and the millstone in oil, and place it on the limb, and guide the woman to her husband each day, so that she cannot become pregnant.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelling is hard and thick, then it is necessary that you apply cups to the spatium-like leaves of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the swelling is from new flesh, then they suspend it from the ninth rib and the coping;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and there are stain-releasing medicines, blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and a mixture of many waters;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then insert a large poultice of plum, so that the wound cannot become septic.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and let it be for a long time, and then insert a tent of dry flax;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then be cured by other treatments until you are healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a wound comes to the marrow, if it needs to be covered according to this method, then it is not incising enchasing abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the encasing abscess which is in the marrow, one should not touch with iron.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are overgrowths of veins without a natural adjustment, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thrombosed.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have already said in the division the similarities of these, and the signs, and I will say here those which receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that embroilments and hardenings, when they are deeply rooted in the marrow, and they do not appear to sensation, if it is not a cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, which one can feel, are those that one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, next stop the flow as with tourniquets, and apply the cupping on its roots, then sprinkle medicines stopping blood flow, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then dip her feet in cold water for an hour, then put her in cold air;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if blood comes out, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and gale and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and oil, and make an plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it sticks, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If that does not work, have her apply cupping glasses to her back and do not rub her breasts with iron;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take a candle, and apply a poultice made from plantain juice or angelica juice with old wine, and set it on the wound.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess breaks, heal the wounded area thoroughly so that it becomes healthy;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough, harsh head, so it must be covered as I have said previously;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then heal it thoroughly until it becomes healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscesses occur in the marrow, such as cancer and piercing abscesses and herpes and swellings and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary therefore that I describe in this treatise the hot abscess that comes from the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that collect pus.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you want to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscesses are agitated at the beginning of their coming, and full of bitterness and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hasten to pierce, but make meure so long as the pain is assuaged.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient sit on a chair, and have small chairs or he leans, and supports himself on his back and brings his feet together in parts of the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be expanded, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a soft linen bond;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then suck the swelling towards the right side, and I will minister the instrument through which one opens the mouth of the marrow, from which afterwards comes the form;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you have seen to minister this instrument, you fix the rule first in order to know the depth of the marrow, so that what enters in from the instrument does not go more deeply than it should, and it does not harm the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the swellings are larger, it is necessary to cover the deepness of the thigh with bandages, so that the swellings do not cause grief.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary to place the point of the instrument above, and to hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses open, and one feels it with the soft hand, then it is necessary to cover at the head, with a spatula-like sheet.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the wound is empty, it is necessary that you put in the wound tents moistened with rose oil, or with green dry oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the tent far from the wound at the depth of the thigh, and put beneath on the thigh and on the whole clean nettle moistened in water or mallow being cooked.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal after 2 days of anointing coming to that, until it be sound.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes lift up the marrow and the wound with a cluster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and a long aristology so they may be cured.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the joint.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is repopened in the marrow, it is necessary to guard against cauterizing with iron, but rather cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is better first to know the natural shape of the child's birth, and the signs are when you see the woman approach from below, and want to odor the arm.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then one hastens the children to issue forth strongly;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then one knows that this child's birth is according to the natural shape, and the issue is under its head, and the second with him;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press his belly lightly, so that the child issues forth quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when he descends on his head, the second is with him, and the marrow of his superfluities is purified by good mundification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes against the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or waist, and is converted by chance upon its neck, and by other bad shapes;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	it is necessary at the handling that it be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the infant comes onto its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of it are weak, then make it sit on a saddle, or the women hold it;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and raise its natural oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then put the handling between its two small spatula-like tools of which this is the form;
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and burn the second layer, and cut to his finger as much as the moisture which is inside corresponds to his fingers.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and pierce the belly of the woman as much as the infants are inside, and if they do not descend, then it is necessary to cleanse the woman with a mustard-based enema with oil of sesame.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her take a purge and evacuator of conditis, and hold her mouth and nostrils for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if the infants are now stuck.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands are frozen, it is necessary that you reset them lightly, little by little.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a chair, and raise her feet high up;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then remove the chair from the ground, and hold onto the woman, so she doesn't fall at the removal.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if he cannot put his hands in, and the infant dies, if he places his hands on the counter which is placed before him, and extracts the child, and resets equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, then it must be pushed upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is straight;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take its feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps just to the hips, if he instructs to take hold, and makes it stretch out with condition;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps far, so God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump frequently as we have said, then it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come far as we have said, then take a poultice of high altitude, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush all in the mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put on the nature of the woman within and remove this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is softened below, have them make a collar of myrrh, and put it below, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have them sit on a seat, then have them stretch out and hold their mouth and nose, and gently press their belly, for the infant now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, if you place the bath of his hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then be swooned on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and be reclining on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands little by little, and then press his hands on the belly, and lift the cushions from below, until it is prepared downwards;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the infant does not jump, take his feet and move them forcefully, then move the belly upwards, then you will thrust your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and heat it little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to grasp them as much as the infants issue.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the delivery of the child who is coming out with one hand while
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it is necessary to re-engage to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman get up and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and bend her legs forcibly;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then massage the muscle that I have touched;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not conceive, then make her sit on a chair, then study how to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and heat the infant according to the natural figure, and make her stretch out, and instruct her to grasp them as much as the infants issue forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	it is necessary that the patient holds his hand, then turn it little by little, and heat it lightly;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, then place on the natural muscle of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, then make it sit on the seat, and instruct it to take hold;
et la fai esternuer.	and make it stretch out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the secondary ones
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to be in this manner throughout the second stage, then touch the second stage with your finger, until the moisture is evacuated;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it forms a crust on its face and neck, then touch the swelling, so that it is not retained, and soothe the inflammation;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to take hold never again;
adonques si istra legierement.	then it will be easier afterwards.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that wounds often grow worse, and sometimes do not heal at all, or only partially.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it happens little.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live well, if they have a little name;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they should be multiplied, and are divided by the Syphac who separates them, which is tied to the belly;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they issue naturally like all things under us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue grievously, thus the cure is as we have said, and let the subtle balm be, and make it smooth and light in what it does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do it thus as it brings health to salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the marrow I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious sage, and it is necessary that the balm knows all this, because by chance similar things happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	do thus according to what is suitable.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman with a dead or stillborn child in her womb, as I have said in the section, and it does not come forth, and you are forced to operate with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is suitable that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is suitable that the woman be placed on her back, and her legs be bent downwards, and her thighs lifted;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife holds the two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not torn apart by the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then anoint the mouth of the womb with moist oils of sage and fenugreek and flaxseed, then rub the belly with these oils and these unguents;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then he puts the bout in the marrows lightly, then wants him to hold his legs where the onions are, and takes care that the veins are apparent as they descend onto his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if he fixes the onions in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the forearm or near the ribs, and if the descents are on his feet, he fixes or pricks them and thus affects the moist places;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and he puts his whole hand lightly, and fixes the onion in none of these places that we have said, until he comes to the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and it is the shape of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then fix one against another onion, or let the third be in a similar way, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they steady themselves equally in moving one way and another, to issue forth, and let the uncle's teeth hold for issuing forth, as it is the form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if it stays in one part, oil the bail with some of its fingers of oil, and rub into that part, and treat the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it does not stay in point, put this uncle or higher up, and do that until it issues forth completely fluent.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by straightening, then you must wrap around the drapil, until it issues forth completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then put a bandage on the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus you must do with the other hand, and on the two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the infant is large and it is constricted in the issue, or it has an assembled sharp head, then you must put the spinal spatula between your two, and make the head and extract the sharpness.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you take hold of the instrument that is called "almidach", because its shape comes with the instruments or surgical tools that are behind this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus in the same way, it makes them have a great natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then treat the bones as tendons, and if the head slips out and it holds onto the forceps, so be careful, as much as the moisture that is or issues forth;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces in the muscles where you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it as much as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is on its feet, it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the mother are lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is constricted in the belly or in the chest, then it is necessary that you stretch it to the wrapping envelope under the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and make an incision in the belly or in the chest, as much as the moisture that flows from it;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limbs are numbed, and the head remains, if he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just up to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then he puts II on the jugular or XII, and draws it forth;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the marrow is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not need to be operated on, but rather to be soothed with moist and fatty things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the soothing plaisters, and apply them in gentle, softening, and moisturizing ways.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then soothe what we have said in the living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and do not have power, if you draw it forth by parts, and leave nothing of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, steady the hands on what we have said concerning abscesses that come in the marrow;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if a flow of blood comes, it should be placed in a tight restraining bandage, and steady other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been dead with a stillborn child, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the other dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a abscess came to him in the belly, and it inflamed so much that it opened, and began to discharge greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted a bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I touched the wound, and I drew back my hands, until the woman was at her best point;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman remained lying thus for a long time, and then she rose up a little from the bed;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I did not recover from this chapter further than because of that which, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to put it in aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the thigh back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, to which one owes the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and it is given to two turners as are the heads of the veins.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the tube be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees it should be, and a palm and a half in length;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and inside the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same tube, which are closed at one end and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two adjustments are pushed into the mouth of the mortar to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, in its likeness more subtle and lighter, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the tenacules.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and it has two heads and two adjustments, as you see, a palm in length, and two fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you want to open the mortar with all the instrument, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet pendant and her legs covered, then push the two adjustments together into the mortar, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then open your hand to the entire instrument, just as you have done with the equal-sized tenails, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marrow, until the bale makes it do what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all mounted above, and are multiplied in their similarities;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the miry ones have been prepared, so much the more hasty is the work, and the higher it stands among men according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second one is retained in infancy, it is necessary that you command the patient to retain his wing, and then make him stretch out his condition, and hold your hands at the mouth and nostrils;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let it jump through that, well it is.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If it does not, take the pot, and make a perforation or covering, and put there herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, sassafras, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or some of them, should be cut or placed under the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a cane or perforated tube, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh, and hold it until the vapors come out from the marsh;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make it distill, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second [injury] happens quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not get better, instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or mastication of alta, and then put it in a natural place, and seek the second [remedy];
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when they have found it, take it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the marsh does not hinder the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then draw it out;
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes apart and falls out of joint.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the thigh is constricted there, we have spoken of the treatment of stretching, and of fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not respond to all that we have said, beware that you do not fall into the trap;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the thigh, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then anoint it with ointment of four herbs;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if it will putrefy and become swollen, and will come to a crisis;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but in any case, when it putrefies thus, bad odour comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	It is necessary then to use fumigations of covenaubles for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have experienced fumigation with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument is where one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second thing, which is this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to make similar to a dog, and place the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the blistering as long as it is roasted, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, thus it has been stopped by subtle signs:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	then it is necessary to give to the patient who perceives it thus at his finger, and does not feel it from a subtle touch, and warns of the bandage that it does not touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on the affected limb in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not stiffen, then put or insert a poultice of warm plaster, and leave it on for many days, and be careful when the children want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes these stoppings come suddenly from a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	then it is necessary to cover that suddenly:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	be cured, as we have said about the treatment of the spear wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the bottom foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are a swelling, and those that come from beneath the deep foundation are a furuncle, or in the space of the two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that swelling is old, it opens, and sometimes moisture introduces a white or subtle pus, and often these fistulas are persistent.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known by the fact that there is an emission or flatulence when the patient makes an effort to vomit, and sometimes by chance it jumps up suddenly.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at the bottom, and does not miss it:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your index finger to the bottom, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, you insert a subtle probe of lead, or a horse hair, until you feel the probe or hair on your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come from bad pertussis or ventilation or vermin, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce badly;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is piercing near the bladder or near the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and it cannot be soothed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just up to the joint of the thigh, then the probe comes just to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the discovery of the pain within, then it is that he immediately bows, and no medicine or sudden remedy by anointing;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistulas one has no cure unless they work hard, and vanity of foolish doctors who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In one that is not a persistent case and not an old one, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he lifts his legs up to his knees, and has his knees inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then apply a straightening iron, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the straightening comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it in his foundation, then you should apply your right index finger, and thus you will feel that the straightening has penetrated;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and be discovered where you feel between your fingers the vital spirit or the flesh, then you know that it is persistent;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can almost always heal everyone, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one does, if it is that one heats the subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it was said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and heat the entire area thoroughly in the fistula, until it reaches deep into the foundation;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these withered fingers are scorched, which resemble a bird's claw;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat the moist gangrenous area with powder, until those fingers are dry, then treat the ointment by sprinkling and applying it suddenly.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, nothing else can be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the knuckle which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the tent [probe] a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering of the vein;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	If you cut open the beginning of the fistula, and cut ahead before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be freed, and will fall.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then I will describe those swollen veins that resemble a bird's claw, and none of them remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, and it is short between you and the joint, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cauteries assemble two bone things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	it is to know, the art of joining these veins, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of swollen tents in mud or in broken pieces of wood, until the juices flow out, and it makes the veins dry in the mud;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed with hard charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near the fontanelle of the fundament, and is separated from the body, then apply your finger or fundament, and inquire into that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between there is the cloth or the silk or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways of fixing and hoping, by the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize as we have said, or you cut just to the foundation, or if you can place tents and cure as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep in the foundation, lest you cut the holding that holds the base, and come upon the evacuations by the senses willingly;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the cure, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the world then it is cut from the deep foundation, either by tent or by another sharp instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then I will define the faulty flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the part that is below the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is something lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And often they are fistulas according to this method:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is or costs against the foundation below, so take a perforated tent at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And thrust the twisted thread into the fistula, and thrust the tent into the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread of that perforation, so that you push your finger or foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the head of the thread, and assemble the two joints together, and hold one to the other, and leave it a day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it often, until the threads absorb the flesh that is between them, and heal.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is sewn up and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the ulcer's dressing too deep inside, and then heal it, as we have said, so that it becomes healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spatula-like instrument that one uses to make a fistula is very sharp at one end and cutting;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and not on the other side, because one should not cut where one should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of the wounds
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Embrodings are in two manners:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	where they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they cut short the blood flow, and there is one or more, and they are deficient in the foundation and at the head of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are deficient have little moisture, and they cut short either a little of citrine water or a little of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to stretch out in a chamber, until the foundations issue forth, and they appear as threads;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and bend it as tendons, or you hold it with your fingernail, then he covers it in its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the tendons cannot hold them back by their moisture, if they take it to the apron, or to the cushion, or to a piece of chamelot;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and stretch it with your fingers, then cover, and sprinkle above some hot powders that are in the fire of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize it as it is said or chapter of cautery, then heal other wounds until he is healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot issue, then cleanse the patient's fundament with a biting and harsh clyster, to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can open freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient cannot pass, and if the veins are far from the fundament, then it is a light cure;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them with your fingernail or with the tenaculum, and you cut, then you cure as we have said, until they are healthy, and they fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you adjust the splint according to this method:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make a piercer pass through the needle from another side, and twist the two ends of the thread below the needle, and so it is doubled in size;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to correct the excessive flow of blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a soft cloth soaked in rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient that they should rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it rest as long as it heals, and when they are calm, if the treatment of bandaging and other treatments, as long as it becomes healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	you must drain thoroughly at the bottom or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is draining of flux in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you reach the tip of a spatula or your finger under the scab, which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it as long as it becomes swollen, as it is necessary.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot swell, recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, as long as it discharges much and becomes scarred.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as long as it becomes healthy.
dou fremit	due to trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formication is a small faulty appearance beneath the skin, and it goes very deeply inwards;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the cold place, and one feels it as if dead from cold, and it comes into all of the body, and more in the hands than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a vein from a goose's wing or a strong vein from a vulture, and place that vein on the frigid area, so that the purple circles encompass the entire frigid area;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all around the vein so that you grasp everything entirely around the frigid area, and place it in the foreground, and scrape the frigid area of its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a cane of iron or copper according to this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	do not pierce, because you must hold at the finger, and press strongly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, if you cauterize the frigid area, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of melted tin or lead;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and never make any of these small and large instruments, according to those for which they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These are the things one uses to treat children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the enema device is small and large above, where the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and there is a disunion where the intestines are tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and it has one of the ribs pierced, and in the other I;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and it has the intestines where one puts medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and it is perceived all around with small piercings, and there is between each piercing I ought to space, then insert into these piercings I strong thread twisted from X or within, and assemble the intestines as if it were a tube;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, then tie it to the instrument in front of with a strong thread, then inject;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and that's the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the practitioner prepares his hands together, so that they are completely steady, then extracts the lancet, and lifts the patient's legs to the bench, and if the medicine wants to exit, it will do so as much as it can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a night completely, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cleanse him of the disease of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to be issued, so recommend it as much as he may be healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or an abscess, so let the lancet be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the shape of the subtle lancet on which the skin should be held firm.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the previous section.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Now we will tell you about the treatments of hands and of medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations or where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by blow of stone, and cut of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where they are made according to the laws of the body, as it is a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come back to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's not a fracture of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely broken and the wound is large, and you doubt strongly about an abscess being hot:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if it makes the cephalic mixture healthier meanwhile if there comes little blood from the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid giving the patient a full meal of wine and coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to get better, let his food be diminished, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, apply a warm compress, or cotton soaked in rose oil or violet oil, or wine steeped in it;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no warm abscess, put on the wound, so it is fresh in all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will tell a little about later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound is moved, put on some ointments, until it be healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be assembled by tugging, then assemble them by suture, as I will say for wounds of the belly, from the suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and it bursts, and no longer holds except for a little, then cover it.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, as if testing and roasting cooked, just like poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a skin lesion, and it does not adhere to the bone, so scrape off the entire lesion, and apply a poultice, then treat.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has become embedded in the wound or vein, without being able to cut it out, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, so try to remove it, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not benefit, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you apply this powder which sticks thus that the wound will close.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	take incense, a part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	Dragon's blood, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	living chalk, three parts, and powder subtly, and fill the wound, and hold it firmly, until it heals well and joins all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then lay it well, and let it not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arsenic has touched the wound, especially in this case, then do not put any of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested ointments, or powders made from water and honey of barley, until it brings forth a scab;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the fractures of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be soothing, as if warm water is poured gently, and mixed with rose oil, and cooled in gentle water, and other minerals of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, then pierce or cut below the hair;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it, and bind it, and cauterize, for that is the trade;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular vein, and the conduits are guarded, because that's where the flesh goes, then sew up the jugular vein on the canal of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he holds it firmly, and leaves it for some days, then cures the wounded place so that it be healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, remove them gently so you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound putrefies, and separate and alleviate the discharge;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if the wound has any windiness where the patient's breath passes through:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	know then that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not absorb the blood that flows deeply, and revives the heart, and kills the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I put an attractive ointment, and apply it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you have no ointment, put a lot of cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if no spasm comes, nor bad trembling of the heart, it is not a sign of evil origin;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, know that the wound is healing.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the thumb of tendons and other cures, until it be sound;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, and ulcerate, then know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the cure is as one ought.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then cure those that are in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, of a suture;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and in having taken pieces, so that the wound closes, and the torn fibers are reunited;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not reunited, let the wound putrefy, thus alleviating the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	because of the obstruction of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are large and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines, because of the introjection of them;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the sewing is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one, because one puts the intestines back in place more easily, if one does not put them back hurriedly;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Here is the translation:
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And you know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common stitches have in the stitching of the belly, and the stitching of other wounds of the body and the two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and however they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will describe each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is outside, and easy thing is to repair, it is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in hot water only slightly, or you cook in hot water squinancy and cypress and spike, and lift up the intestine until the swelling is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and often makes these veins retract, and it is murdered that they are loosened by desinflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the inflammation departing, if you moisten the intestine with water or wine and bad humors are cooked, because by this the entry is aligned to a small thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little wound at the instrument by which one gathers the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is murdered that the cutting, that we must not cut without great necessity there is;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments for making a fissure:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut within the curve and do not stray, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts forth, if you reset it according to its natural form in its proper place, you should be able to put it back, for that is worth much.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is large, and it is in the part below the belly, then you must make the patient sit on his back, and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower part of the belly, set the head and the foot higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts then put attention to this, so that the injured part may be higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, use what appears suitable to you, then hold it between your hands and apply gentle pressure that touches the entire rupture with your hand, and bring the lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common method of sutures, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound a space of two fingers, and insert a needle or have a strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the siphac, which is beneath the skin within, until you make it pierce through that part, and join the two heads of the siphac together with the four.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then strain with a double thread beneath the needle of two parts, then assemble the two heads of the wound gradually, and then leave the finger of space, and fix another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then thread the second string just as you did with the first needle, and do not cease from doing so according to what you have mastered of needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse, for the subtle needles grasp all the flesh, and those that are too coarse cannot enter well;
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Because it is necessary that they be moderate;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin, lest they grasp and open the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then grasp the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping, and put tents or drapes on the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of treating with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it suffices to use a single needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second treatment is common, and it is where you bring together the two heads of skin and the two heads of the superficial fascia, assembling them to one needle or having a strong middle thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these heads all four together, then reassemble the needle at the part where you began, in the manner of sewing clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitch the width of a smaller finger.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	this stitching suits the man, and I sewed a wound that a certain man had in his belly, which was injured by a knife, and it was more than a palm in length, and it was two palms deep into the intestines, and it was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I will bring back the intestine then when it had been stopped for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up to 15 days, and it healed, and was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they looked at him who was judged to die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not care for his treatment, because I stood in the place where they did not find any, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and applied sense upon the wound cotton very little twice a day, and washed with warm honey water until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and sew up the defective part just to that inner depth;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if you have sewn up the head of the siphac or stitched or you have sewn with the needle, and make it pierce another part of the defective inner area;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the intention of this suturing is that you sew thus as the pelletier makes the pellets, and that you leave one time the siphac of one part, and take it again from another, until the suturing is entirely complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way of suturing, which Galen described properly, is like no other font, which naturally assemble the two parts together, and apply one head to the other head, in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Take a needle or a head of a mirror close by, and make it pierce the limb only slightly, and let the two heads of the suture;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the weak part just up to there within, as the two heads of the suture;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make one and the other pierce from the weak part just up to there within, in the two other heads of the mirror that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the worst way of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen said this in his speech, and none of them testify, that one should sew the belly with two needles, or thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must thrust a needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is within the belly, it is the suture more grievous than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the arrow had moved, then reset the intestine, and the skin;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on the powder soothing charm, and if the arrow had moved, then put on no ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the thread, and be sewn the seam, and the membrane;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure the wound as with the others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicines, put them on, as soon as it begins to gather pus, much cotton, and change it twice a day so that it be healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other remedy in many cases when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will not make a community with the principal members, then it is necessary that you anoint lightly with oil of tempered heat, or oil of rose, and put it between the limbs, and beneath the wounds;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it feels pain or bloating in the belly, and many times it happens, then they are cleansed with red wine enema, and meanwhile the bloating reaches just up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it pierces within, and knows that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded, and it is because of the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approaching of its nature to the kidneys.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if he jumps away from the wound, set him back just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has turned towards black, then you must lay the black spot, from which the blood flows, for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the ligament, and place the two heads hanging down from the part below the wound just until it reaches to ease the extraction when the hairs fall, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture from the swelling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some homes, because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced by a lance in his belly;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it was the wound on the right of the stomach, and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus stopped the evacuation and the flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I make a cure according to what I can do, and did not cease from subtling until it was healthy, and the eyes were sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it sounding, I doubted that the patient had a bad condition in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but he remained in better disposition, and was eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take firm threads, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the thread has covered the mouth, place it on the two lips, so that it draws its mouth together;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cover the head, and it holds so that it cannot dislodge, then put another thread afterwards in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the intestine is torn inside, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the head of this intestine thread that is very clean, and then tie it to the head of this twisted subtle thread, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in its place;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of suturing the intestines is not forced except according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, if there is no ingenious way to heal it, except with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whether it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it is hairy and produces a swelling.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the true notion of a hard and white scab, where one does not feel pain, and it is also shaped like the feather of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in a clear hollow, and another time thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and another time enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have already spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healthy, and there is no flesh, this is only due to one of the 8 causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, by the small passage of blood or flow;
ou por sa malice;	or through its badness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much hollow;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the liquid is putrid, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and weak by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is fitting that I teach you about the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and from the arteries, and from the nerves, or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it happens that it comes to the property of the principal member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is a fistula that does not come near the place I have told, and you have confidence in the cure, and you know how to recognize it, if you take a thread of iron or steel, if the fistula is straight, if you seek;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle tenderness of pricking, because the pricks pierce much into the twist.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has many perforations and you cannot explore well by pricks, then cleanse it through one of the perforations, because moisture runs from one perforation to another, and it is clarified.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then ask for the power of your judgment, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and it is cut off in the deep, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the putrid flesh and the corrupt humors that are within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the treatment so that it be healthy, and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you must cut deeply, as much as you can, then you put tentacles of medicine ague, and the joints just at the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the superfluity which remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put ointments in a healthy clear skin, so that it be healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healthy through this, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve grieves or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove it as much as the corruption is entirely removed, then treat the things in a healthy clear skin so that it be healthy.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healthy, and renders void thus as before, know that you have not been misled just until now
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it becomes uncovered and seeks as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the joint
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tongs, if it is suited to the instrument convenient for that, and if there are many bones, treat them all, do not leave any behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear, if it is moist and dry and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot dislodge them at one hour, then put on the wound a poultice that promotes suppuration, and let it be until the abscess is formed around the bone, and then they will have less difficulty with the bones.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, then remove so much of the decay until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the corrupted bone, and it reaches to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary to saw and cut all the way to the corruption, and then to cure until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body, so much that the materials came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to remove it by surgical opening.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the mirror shows them by their foolishness overpowering so much that the abscesses open, and they corrupt many materials, and become fistula, and it comes from many perforations that everything goes to waste and moisture of the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many a mirror that mirrored a cure within 12 years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands, so much that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and those that corrupted through the perforations to a great body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young patient would become red, and had a yellowish tint.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I thrust a probe into one of these holes, and then explored all the holes, and found that one vein came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hastened then, and cut into one of the perforations as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw that which appeared to me from the corrupted bone, and believed that there was no other corruption, except for that which I had seen;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and begin to restore the wound with medicine soaks for a long time, and cannot be sutured;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the continued corruption in the bone, and the decay, and then I stopped, and thought about suturing the limb;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not do so much that I grasped around a palm of the bone, and pulled it out with all its thickness, then restored it with medicines;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healed and sutured quickly, and did not need to begin the work again for the faintness of the patient, who could not suffer, and for fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because the bloody evacuations often occur, but it was entirely healthy, and a hard crust formed on the bone, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in everything, neither to alleviate nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a lien, and hold it at the head of the bone that is open, and instruct him to stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another thicker bandage on top of the first one, and tie it to the flesh that is above the bone, and tighten the head, so that you draw out the corrupt flesh from below, and uncover the flesh on the spot where you see swelling, lest the swelling burst the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a probe or a tube below the bone to drain out the corrupt flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and thus it is necessary to explore as one can see and feel the corruption, and explore again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the whole flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put a probe below, and then explore from one part to the other for the corruption, and be the surgeon who removes the length of the corrupted part, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and sew up the bone or where it connects to the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to amputate;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand or finger of the foot, then it is very strong that thing, but anyway it is necessary that you investigate that corrosion, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and treat it in all the ways that you can, but make sure the vein or nerve does not work against you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incisions and the seams to cut these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the holes, and their thickness and their subtlety, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore he must prepare each similar appearance of work his instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and it will testify to the methods of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument you will need according to what he requires.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The heads perforate either because of denseness or because of fierceness;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicated that corrosion by the treatment of medicines, and it does not benefit, if it is necessary to amputate that member up to where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes death or malice, which is greater, from the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the members turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads, since it goes from one member to another, and takes over the whole body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you hasten to cover, and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, like scorpion of sea and viper and similar, if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, if you touch, do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, if you touch at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, if you touch at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and no remedies are of use except the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and thus always do when the corrosion reaches to the foot:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, then touch after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then touch the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and let it rise in the leg, if it gathers at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and let it come above the knee, if there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the way to bandage or to splint the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister below the lower ligament, and another minister above the upper ligament, and you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then bandage or splint, and put a layer of linen on each part, so that the splint does not touch the healthy skin, and comes to the patient with another wound and abscess thus.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the skin hastily, or apply some restraining powders above.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine as long as it is accomplished, then tie the numb member with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will count that it had an ounce of powder in that pie:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	it had a blackness that seemed to be burnt by fire, and that corrosion came first in his finger near the pie, so much that it seized the whole pie;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the pie, and was healthy;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after that the corrosion returned to his hand, and it came to me, and I put on things receptive to the purification of the body, but could not stop the corroisons;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he saw that I was treating his hand, and I did not want that, for I had hoped to repulse the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I doubted also that he cut off his hand, so it wouldn't die, because the strength of the man was feeble;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired at once, and returned to his land, and ceased to coop up his hand, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not counted it a failure because of this that one does another task, if one has mastery.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	At no time did an abscess come on the flesh, and it stayed so long that it made a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it burst and pierced, and the pus jumped out, and the veins were empty, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin which is above is as subtle as the delicate sheets, and does not corrode to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so enlarged that it reaches just to the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin if it is that you cut entirely around, and likewise when it is subtle, just like a thin sheet;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not be afraid of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you think that the skin is rotten, and the corruption is not in depth, and the skin is thick with flesh, then heal it with a poultice thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the wounds are large, and the pus that is in them is of foul odor, then cleanse with a medicine made from Egyptian remedies, which is thus prepared:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take ashes, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in a vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take of this according to your necessity, and make it into a point and in the middle, and cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine sit for two hours, then wipe it off by sprinkling;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the wound is made whole, and the pus is gone;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and no time is cleansing with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and pour water on them, then stir, and cleanse, until you know that the wound is well healed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse with water and honey, or where there is a little bit of crushed litharge;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	where you mix honey and wine in a blend, so that the honey has properties of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the healthy.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are confident that the wound is well cleansed, if you blend what makes flesh grow in it, and it is that you take a plaster made with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you blend some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have described in the treatise on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the opening of the wound is small, and the cane of the syringe cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with an iron tool, and apply there a tents of Egyptian ointment, or royal balsam ointment, until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then sew it up and let it heal so much that the syringe or cane can enter, and if the opening that gushes out is above, then cover or apply below where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the belly is in depth, if he does not let it swell there;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the lower back in this way as you see, it appears in such a manner that the belly reaches the lowest place it is, for when the belly is in depth, if he does not let it swell there; and if you cannot cover the lower back in this way as you see, it appears in such a manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the belly reaches more lightly downwards, and does not let anything of the belly;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and stretch over it a layer of linen that covers the whole wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover the forces in the right place of the deep wound as much larger than at first, then stretch a soft ointment over another layer according to the quantity of the wound, and put it on the wound of the belly to alleviate it, and do not remove the large bandage except after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and he who is above the breast's pertussis, often suffers to open the bowel, and knows that which runs from the bowel, whether it be venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take heed that the patients feel pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps upon the breast's pertussis, then knows that the breasts have altered already, and approaches health;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then loosen it in the morning, or the third day, and when you open the wound, if you change to another dressing, and renew the binding.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if his senses are bewildered indignant after many days, know that his senses are not yet clear.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if you come subtly to a long tension, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are men who delay in healing their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the bowel is undigested it jumps from the breast after many days, knows that the breasts have not altered;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the senses are slow to understand, and it is delayed, if you add medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue, as we have defined, because there is a great part of glass, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take a definite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of much wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then congeal it and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same thing makes honey cakes thick, when definite ointments are not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then glue it to the plaster, and apply it to the breast, and many times it helps an Aristologist, and celestial roots, which is also like flour of veins and a hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in use of simples or of compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the wound is lengthy, and it is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption has penetrated deeply, and makes an impression on the bone, or on the hard members, or on the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that grows under the nail of the thumb or toe, or happens by chance to grow in other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is enveloped, and one does not take care, if it comes to the abscess thus, and corrodes and eats away so much that it corrodes the root of the nail, and by chance it corrodes everything;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come the ulcers up to the bone, as long as it comes to painful swelling, and is the head of two large fingers, and is the color dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, it is necessary that you cut away all the excess flesh that remains on the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses on the flesh inside, and it begins to prick, and the blister, then you must put the straight edge underneath the nail so that it does not touch the flesh, and bend it upwards, and carefully and gently lift the subtle flesh, and apply the remaining flesh with burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wounded areas until they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you will cover it, and pull hard, for as much as the bone is corrupted it is, so it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the finger corrupting, cover it with one of our remedies as mentioned before, then heal it until it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is bruised, and swollen, and feels great pain, then it is necessary that you soothe him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the edge of the spatula obliquely while cutting across, and beware that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the ankle, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on it to calm it down.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all flesh, and by chance they have a part where they have bones, and sometimes they have an angle, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is not in any of us from the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born without a nail on the finger does not move it, and he who is born with a joint on the finger, perhaps moves it;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the cut of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if you hold it with a copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In one that is born with a toe in the back node, it is necessary that you first cut the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable joint for that, then cure until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pains that come together arise from birth, or from sudden wound, or from burn by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you know how to bind this wound, then you must repair it according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two clean cloths or moistened drapes in rose oil, so they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two subtle pieces of plaster, until the wound is closed, as it is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	they suddenly come together with the palm, if they grasp that joint so it is necessary.
des vils	the bad ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	They are gross, swollen veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come into many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they happen more in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the intestine, and then the blood of the basilica vein.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron treatment is according to two manners:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that they are bound, and one draws out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other manner is that you raise the vein, and draw it out entirely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cutting is done according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	Raise the leg first with a warm, very hot, towel, so that the gross sinew becomes subtle, then stretch the patient's leg from above the hip down to the part beneath the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein in I, II or III, with a large incision, then release and draw out black blood at your hand, from one head to the other, until as much of the blood as the patient's virtue can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then lay him down, and instruct him to abstain from eating black bile-inducing foods;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommence the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The elevations of the bone are done according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Raise the patient's leg, if it has a lot of hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with a warm, hot towel, until it becomes red, and inflates the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bone, if you heat with fire, and then touch the vein at the bottom of the long thigh at the knee, or in the part below the joint;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of each part, until it appears as one feels;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it is seen red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then apply the treatment below, until it is raised from the skin, and then bend it at the ankle more lightly, then touch it in another place above three fingers;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it with the razor, as you have done, and bend it to another ankle, as you had done previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then touch another incision, or more if you have mastery of it, then lift it, and touch the toe of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second incision;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then strip the patient to the waist, as long as it takes full strength, then the scalpel;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot draw and lift it, if you push a needle to the strong double thread, and tie and pull, and you push underneath, and turn your hand from one side and the other, as long as it takes;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and beware that it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot draw or lift, and harm comes to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have entirely drawn it, then put on the place of the wound a clean linen cloth soaked in wine and rose oil;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and rolled up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must bend it straight, but do not cut it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and the treatment thus as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron that one uses to open the vein is curved, and does not cut, so it does not cut the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is the form.
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is in the legs, in warm regions where there are no herbs nor trees, and in earth where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and perhaps grows in another part besides the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that arises beneath the skin, as it comes from within the serpent-like and worm-like courses, growing between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg, then it changes the joints, and the vein begins to issue forth, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head opens, it is necessary that you envelop around a piece of cloth one and a half inches long, and the knot, and leave the cloth on the leg, and all the times when there is no deficiency, if you envelop around the cloth, and the knot.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it in its root, until it is entirely extracted.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridity in the limb, and a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it happens often with this vein when it is treated with a long lancet, or with X, and a man came to me who had an issue with X fingers long, and when you cut it, the reason bursts out or perforates, and pierces all the way to the bottom, so that everything flows out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and let the material that is inside be evacuated, and mix in the limb medicines that prevent putridity any day, then heal as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And at no time does the vein often break, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot, or of the hand, and much pain comes from it, and therefore it jumps often;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure then the fingers thus as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of wounds that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "disease of the ox", because it has often affected the oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the whole body ascending and descending, and one feels it well as it passes from member to member, until it dislodges the skin or where it goes, and jumps suddenly;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is generated by putrefaction of certain humors, just as come worms and serpents and lice and ascarids in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and doubt not of its malice, for when it travels through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance returning, and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and there are often times
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see that it is curing and treating, if one cannot do better than when it was:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	it is necessary then that you lift the limb above and below with a strong and tightly bound bandage, then cope with it and treat it firmly, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it, if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does, is that it corrodes the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or approaching near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly below him, then cope with it, and treat it firmly;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the patient's purification of body by medicines that dissolve bad humors, and beware of eating foods that cause putridity.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see this which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I examined her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and I soon saw, as it were, a vein rising like a worm at the shoulder, swifter than anything, like living silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder, and then soon after spread throughout the whole body, until it came into the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it often turned back towards the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed at how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I had wanted to know well how the pain moves from one place to another, but I did not know it, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins, and therefore appeared constrained by this wind;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and I did not appear to follow this reason according to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you want to cure this disease, and the patients feel that pain, it appears to you as we have said, if you lift up and down quickly, and then cut above so that this windy constriction releases at the site of the injury;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the site;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your eyes, so the treatment of that which drives out windiness, such as foul-smelling pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their is that there are those which have large points, and small, and curly, and swollen;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those with elbow joints, and of those with knee joints, and of those where there are broken pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which falls in no member if it falls according to two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	where the principal member is injured, such as head, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls therefore in no place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this evil sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply in, then pull it out, and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the signs of the head when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and falls upon the brain, are when there is concussion and swelling and inversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it happens without force of the nostrils, or of the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it affects the speech and the voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps from the white moist spot resembling an abscess, and jumps out as if breaking through skin;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and it is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow so it does not remain.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls into the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not soft.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the arrow moves as if it were an abscess, and cuts out black blood, and brings on chill and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	you will then feel no doubt that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the arrow that never leaves the forearm are that without flatulence of scum bursts from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold region.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the bladder, it is between the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and gives great numbness and great pain and sighs;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and moves all the shoulder members.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, perhaps it bursts from the wound some undigested food matter.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead is in the chest or belly, and there is no escape from the intestine's route, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes back, and the patient feels strong pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as with the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and the similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because that's how you should do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man who had an arrowhead shot into the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I touched it, and drew it out from beneath the fat of the ear, and it was healed without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I drew out an arrowhead that had shot into the fat of the eye beneath the skin beneath, and the arrowhead was repulsed, and I could not touch it except for the point towards the wood, and it was a large arrowhead from a Turkish bow, with a very light iron without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	I was healthy, and no evil accidents happened to me.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow at the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beards, and subtly touched until I extracted it, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I extracted an arrow from the man whose head or belly it was piercing, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change at all;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut around the arrow, and I dislodged it, and I extracted it forcefully, and there was no evil accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose arrow falls on his back, and the wound was swollen above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remained within him, and he did not change his natural disposition, nor did I find harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you see another man, who had an arrow shot into his face, and the wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and he lingered thus, suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And he extracted an arrow from the king's prince's hand, which was stuck in his nail, and it was slightly leaning to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was entirely removed.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to the treatment after it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I applied a subtle tension, and I did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt piercing pain and hurt beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow I put on the affected area a topical plaster, attractive and digestive, because the wounds did not become inflamed;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it appears to me the abscess of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on the wound yesterday, and redressed the wound itself, and afterwards the patient felt the arrow for a long time, until he felt it in his nose.
et il le me dist.	and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put a corrosive medicine on the wound for many days, until it was opened, and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which had lodged in the flesh.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I probed into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it went beyond the limits for four months, and then I enlarged the wound if I touched the tendons, and moved them from one side to the other, but could not remove it.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Then I did not cease to refine and to engineer in ways of instruments, until I took it the next day with well-made tenailles, according to what its form would come at the end of this chapter, until I treated it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I then restored it, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for the book cannot take everything in.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, at the understanding of the strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not issue from limbs where they are fixed except according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the soil or they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps forth where it enters, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it be so that the flesh is purified around it, and may its exit be eased;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and thus if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be so for some days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around it with a subtle iron, so that the flesh around it is enlarged, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the vents of the brain, and none of the accidents that I have said appear to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	Do not pull it back, but let it be until it is even after some days, for if the arrow-head comes just to the surface, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck deeply in the bone, and does not come up to there, and the patient remains for some days without bad accident, then prepare to remove it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very deeply fixed and cannot issue forth, then administer tareres around, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the wound until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow-head is embedded in the body of the corpse so that one cannot see it, then seek it everywhere with a probe.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow-head, and there is no bone or nerve, then make an incision until the wound is large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and draw out the arrow-head if you can, and if it has in the arrow-head hooks by which it holds, then remove the flesh that is fixed to two parts of the muscle where you can, and then break or bend the hooks of the arrow-head, so that you can extract it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly understand that you do not break the arrow, that you remove it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, let it remain until the surrounding flesh is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood makes you act contrary, then amend what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and set in motion how you can safely remove the arrow without danger, whether quickly or slowly, or firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow fell on him, for it is the greatest aid that it be so, and if you cannot, then arrange him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it appears to be nothing of his, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it outwardly.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Cut then above, so that the tongs can grasp, and then it is stretched.
si saut fuer maintenant.	If it bursts forth now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot exit, let it be left again, and then resume the extraction until it bursts forth;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it back into the whole shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the shaft is short, and you want to administer a push, if you administer the instrument skillfully, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then push forth, and if the arrow is shaved, push the instrument to the entering point, to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut around the whole flesh where the veins are, so you can, then heal the wound as it fits.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow is short or heavy or in the belly or in the bladder or in the side, and it is close by, and you can cover above, push it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, such is the craft;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it be healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs with which one extracts arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and you see its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the instrument for extracting is like the claw of an eagle's foot, to grasp at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape.
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pushing and for extracting, that's how it is:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of the veins from which one bleeds are 31, where there are 16 main ones, it is to know:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	two veins that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the two eyebrows of the two eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two bandages which are at the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and laypeople call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the median is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and laypeople call it "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic is on the right side, and laypeople call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and it is the one from which they bleed, which appears manifestly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the savior is the vein which is between the auricular and the anular, and if it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is beneath the curve of the left thigh on the left side, and the second Sophia which is at the ankle of the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nese", which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins beneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient catharrhes, and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the health, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	Then he tightens the patient's neck to a vice, so that the two veins appear behind the ears in the two dependent dew-collecting vessels of the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where the tubes reach your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	Then take the lancet and insert it beneath the vein just up to the bone, then lift your hand above the whole vein, and cut and open the skin and the vein well, two inches deep, and make the blood flow out until you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then stop it and hold it, until it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The health of the two arteries that are in the temples, if it is to emigrate an old and worn-out optic nerve, and accustomed to obtalmia, and in the course of tears, it affects the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the healer is thus as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel beneath your finger, and then make a sign of engraving;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the heart up to the vein above your finger's index, and insert the lancet beneath, and lift the vein above, and the cupping, just as you have done in the other veins, and make the flow of blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then lower the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form it firmly, and let it be until it is healthy;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, which is the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The sanity of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the sanity of the head in ancient diseases of the face, and in migraines, and in redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and leave the vein until it is healthy and never again will it be swollen from a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it does not seem that the flames should be too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the sanity of transverse, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The health of the two veins that are in the two arms helps the eyes, and the tongue, and the nostrils, and the little filaments in the eye, and the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patients strain their neck by twisting in some direction, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the health, and so the healthy part of traversing, a little thick, a little long, a little wide flame, for there is no spot of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it breaks;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and place it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The health of the vein of the nose is worth ague, and to severe headache, and to diseases of the face, as in migraine and redness that comes into the face, and especially when it is ancient;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strains his neck, then he stretches out his nose to his left hand, and takes a subtle flame long, and fixes it in the lever which is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well, and the blood will now begin to flow.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too far in depth, and make the blood flow according to necessity, then leave it for a night, because it is nearly completely restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The blood of the two gums helps with the constriction of the vein, and at the beginning of messelerie, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corroding, and in herpes, and similar things.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strains his neck on one side and then the other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and be the masters standing over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on the stool, then opens a vein on the arm a little widely, then draws out some blood temperately, or as much as is needed;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then reopen another vein, then release the bandage, and hold both veins moderately, so the patient does not strangle;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it be until morning, so the wound may be healthy.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above the liver helps in the collection at the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks of the lips, and painful nose and interior.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the healing is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the leaf, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right leaf and the other on the left, and you recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins;
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Here is the translation:
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is at the narrowing of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the veins is such that the patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a dark vein;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	examine one and then the other, and do not press too hard in depth, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the neck that are commonly examined are divided into two manners:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where we prick with a flame making a large scar, or subtly with an olive-shaped instrument as if cutting with a scalpel, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are large and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame burning so is very renowned, and it is large as if you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins with a broad, flat needle that appears to contain much blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it's the form of the flame of olive oil:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it's more subtly pointed, and is for clearing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The juice of the basil, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the vein to bleed slowly, and that it be wary of the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and a lot of blood comes out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one must not hold the flame in a piercing way, but rather cut skillfully as if with an anvil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basil does not open manifestly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	where you want no vein of it, where you sensibly feel in his hand the vein within the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the cupping at the flame anus, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to recognize the hand of the wound, it is necessary also that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the hand as much as you recognize the pulsation;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then signal the hand of the incision, and then stretch out the arm, and cup the vein at the flame anus;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the hand swollen, for it is an artery:
eschui la donques.	avoid the tendons.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it spout out above like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is not from an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Here is the translation:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Here is the translation:
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be above fear, and do not move them until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not cleansed, and it fails you, and the medicine does not present itself to you, then cut open the artery, for the head of the veins retreats.
et estainche li sans.	and cleanse the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a fistula of figs, and apply it, and take one of the embers and lay it well just up to the other joint.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the wound is cleansed, that's good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then make a cure, as we have said, with powders that cleanse blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the cleansing is not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possession of the ease of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The health of the vein in a thousand ways helps it draw blood from the head above, and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be wary of the nerve that lies beneath, and if he presses too hard in front, and he touches the nerve, and he inflames and the health becomes grievous, and by chance he cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve is exposed many times, and if it does not appear in any men due to its subtlety, it is necessary that you anoint the instrument with oil;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid touching the nerve with your thumb.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two fingers, then make it bleed far away.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The surgery of the head is helpful, because it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to surgically puncture at the flame of olive or at the flame of myrtle, because it is the safest of all the veins, since there is neither nerve nor artery beneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to choose the lightest hand, and not to hurt anything if one fails the first time, and one recommences;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when they fail at first, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about healing is that health is not maintained except by guarding against disease and avoiding future illnesses.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the health be made in one of the three veins that are at the joint:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, fasting, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one must heal at the beginning of taking medicines in spring, and in autumn and in winter after digestion, when the signs of replenishment appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must heal on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The health that is maintained against diseases has no fixed hour determined, but only when need is of day or night, in all hours and in all tensions;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus for less than four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should they be cauterized, the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever way it may be, it is necessary that they empty the intestines with a light clyster, if they have much retained wind, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should one be cauterized who is too full of food, nor who is drunk, as long as it may be fervent, nor dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and one should beware of cauterizing after passionate colic, and vomiting, and decay of the stomach, and multiple births for a woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and that which is all virtue, or by means of the arm or gentle body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly balance the humors, if his blood is thick, through food and through drinks and through medications, so you have little power over it;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter into a bath, since nothing can deflect it, to subtly balance the blood, and you will be healthy from the vein of the foot up to the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and beware of that day of labor, and of point, and of luxury, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be gentle and joyful, and let the healthy ones be higher than those whom one heals, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently extract the limb above, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the blood;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the joint with your hands, until the veins swell, and feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then anoint the healthy ones with a little warm oil, then put his right hand on that vein below the joint a little where it wants to heal, so the vein does not flee and fails to be cauterized.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	Because there are veins that flee like cords to the sainier, and if there are those that are full of windiness, so when one puts on the flame, it draws back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it opens the vein, so is the wound too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeons be informed about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein opens for the first time, it's good.
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the hastening, if the veins are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are swollen, and the patient is in a hurry, let him go for a day or two, and do not tie up the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perhaps he will come to ripen abscesses.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	He does not enter into a bath, then renews his health as it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the perforation is small, where the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue so much blood as you see, then prick in the same perforation all the way to the right vein;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and let the instrument proceed slowly, so that the veins are not inflamed;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for it often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein inflamed, do not renew the health, and put on a little of lukewarm oil, for it alleviates the pain of the blood, and is mixed in this vein with the oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the lukewarm oil to each health that you heal the veins, in order to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same makes a triangle and bulge of eyes, when one places it on the place;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if the sensation is subtle and separates when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not healthy except at the time or the opening of the vein is small, be quick, and place on the spot a wet sponge in water and boil it slightly hot, and hold for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the spot for several days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place on something of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, mastich, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Put your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, then that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Beware lest you do not put it on anything of what we have said, for perhaps in the short run without an artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but you make a counter-pressure there to harden the spot, then heal with another healing, until it be healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And bleed each one of blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the wound is black, let it issue forth until it be red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it gross, let it be until it be subtle;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that they make a larger wound, and be the flames large;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits them healthier slowly and often, and they must be healed by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of healing is free from deterioration of blood and gathering of nerve, and is worth more than the healing of a long or wide wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to one whose body needs healing, it suits to give a soft poultice made from the juice of green apples;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if it is inflamed, then draw out three or four times the blood; and if it is of cold complexion, then anoint beforehand with a soft poultice in muscat syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he touches the wounded area, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he applies a warm poultice of flesh, and a subtle smelling syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to relieve his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is weakened by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to relieve his arm after the first bleeding, and it has a strong course, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to bleed from another part, should be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood within the body that is already inflamed, and it brings on fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if you need to treat a large quantity, and widen the hole as much as it takes in a poultice;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you observe all the signs of health, and place your hand on the pulse when it is healthy, so death does not occur in the poultice, and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and do not hesitate when you see the arm relax, and make the blood flow a second time, and the hole is closed, so you press firmly on;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	not if it is curved, that he stretches the arm hastily, for that would be harmful;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it be until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	where you apply the tip of the flame, until the blood that has congaled at the opening of the vein flows out, and put on the soft skin a little aqua, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed twice, if the vein is in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is bled in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of the healing is such that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the vein becomes red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be wrapped moderately, so that the vein appears good, then the wound is now sewn through, not too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the punctures be large, and let it be well sewn near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot get it out, then put the hand in warm water again, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in winter, do not put the hand in warm water again, for one puts it more in ice than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the little finger on the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand, and put it in warm water, until the vein becomes swollen, if you see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you cross it over, and if you touch it gently all around, so that nothing hurts;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go too deep in the front, because the nerves are very close to the bare skin, and then put the hand in warm water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot issue forth.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out blood as much as necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the hand on the left side is worth it against the disease of the thigh, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The wisdom of the sapient is worth all the diseases that are beneath the body, as much as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and ancient legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of his vein is such that the patient puts his foot in warm water, and rubs against the vein until it appears, and lays it above the joint of the foot.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot many roots go forth;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	vein where there is a larger root, or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you make an incision on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and make the incision as in copying.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and be the flames gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sensation cannot emerge, reset the foot in the water, and let the vein be well cleared.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the surgeons fail the first time, start again a little above, because the sore is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt of nerve, as we have said, and thus make a suture from the same foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic leg are at the junction of the thigh, and their surgery is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his wound is that the patient will be in a bath, and extract above the Villon III veins by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then make an incision in all the ways that you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth more that you copy, because the sore is dry, and it is much restored to many homes.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then there is no healthy vein that opens or closes under the little finger, and towards the small toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make the blood flow as you see, and then release the bond, and put on cotton and hold it in place;
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	of the veins of the cupping
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Cupping vessels are made of horns, or of antlers, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and cupping is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this cupping that is without striking is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is with fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and cupping that is done by striking and by extraction of blood is done in 14 places on the body, one of which is entirely on the top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other is in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the others are in the hollows of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction underneath the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction on the shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction on the crops;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suctions in the arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suctions of the legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suctions of the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suction does not draw out blood, because of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason one should not be afraid to do it, as is done with healthy veins;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered, neither with full fire nor without sensation of fire, in any disease that comes from excess, as long as the whole body is evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to suction, or for habitual conditions, one should administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they have the task of bleeding, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are those who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to evacuate after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saliva of the mouth helps with the grief of the head ... that comes to their eyes, and it is not suitable that it be after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this bleeding is in the place of the saliva of the head, and it is not suitable for one who is of a cold complexion or has a catharr, because that does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because of this it does not seem to me that the old men who have or have had cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often feels dizzy, becomes oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation in the neck is in the place of the healthy head and the basilica, and because of this it is worth to strengthen the foot of the thigh, and to sew up the channel of the forearm, and to touch, and to replenish;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it does not seem to push much, because it holds too firmly, if it injures the obliquity or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilations at the ribs of the neck are worth the pains of the head, and obtalmia and emigration, and to constriction, and to the pain as roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healthiness of the basilica;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it seems that you instruct the healthy one to press his hand to put, so he does not cut the artery, and does not cause a flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The evacuations below the chin are valid for a disease of the mouth, and for a decay of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the area of the healthy lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilations of the ribs are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The evacuations of the thigh are as valuable as those of the three large veins of the arm, for they attract blood from these thick veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon to not make too many perforations, for the leg is nourished by flesh, and knows of its lower nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The evacuation that is on the backside is as valuable as hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the evacuation be large, and be of a kind, so that it has mastery to treat well;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it was subtle, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and you make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cupping on the legs heals openly, for they attract blood from the whole body, and alleviate ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and restore the flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are in the place of two siphons, and of two tubes, and nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring about gangrene in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the cup is that you put it on empty, and suck in moderation, and put it on hastily, and remove it equally, and do not cease from doing this, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the flow of blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then heat, and reapply the cupping, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have such a temperament, and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	it is necessary to cauterize once gently, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and a little deep ones;
et suce legierement.	and to suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to subtly open up the way for the large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw out the blood little by little, then we suffice with a single cauterization.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, we recommence often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the wound is deep, fire in deeply, and the terminations are such that the coursing should be perceived suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have stiff pores, to anoint the keys of the ventouses with opening and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is in this case, of violet oil, or of almond oil sweet, or of oil of cucumber seed;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in Iviera, of oil of cress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is applying the fire cautery has a tender and large pores, it does not require putting oil, but it requires washing after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he raises from aniseed, or from aqua of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have gross superfluities lift themselves with old wine, or water of sage, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he be warned, when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are healthy and choleric, and their blood is too sharp and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it is necessary to take cold things, such as unripe apples and endives and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and mild sauces, and flesh of pheasant, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mild sauce, and mild sauces and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he will be purging, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some men three or four draughts of triacle or muscat before purging, or after, to comfort the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the juices be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The purges that are applied without fear of wounding are those that are applied to the liver, and to the spleen, and to the podagric parts, and to the belly and the bowel and the kidneys and the thighs, for these members cannot suffer wounding on the skin, and one does not do it except to attract blood from member to member, just as we put them on the marmots when the veins are healthy;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	To remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and on the hip to diminish the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it does when one puts them on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity, and these cupping glasses are ministered empty by sucking too strongly;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are ministered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in maladies of the pleura, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with warm water or hot water where herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two large and half palm-width of perforation, and it has or is coated next to the mileu a small hole, just as if to put a needle, and so of arain, soft in front if it does not bother the patient when putting on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and have in hand a rod of across iron or steel, to put a clamp in place, and be they large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the blisters of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean than the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must then put this blister on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the clamp of wax or linen, and put it in the blister across the rod that is in the blister, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the blister, lest it burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and be careful that it is on the part that we have said, so that when one looks, if the vapor goes away, and remove the blister;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the linen as before, and reapply it often, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping device which is administered in disease of the lungs, to all aquosity, it has no edge nor perforations, and is not administered unless when it is full of aquosity, and is placed on the limb only so much;
et c’est li forme:	and that's its shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without them being administered unless on members where one cannot put cupping devices due to their smallness, such as eyelids and cheeks, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the naked parts of the body, such as fingers or toes, and other similar ones;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the usage is that when you find cuppings that are in gentle, sweet, and clear spaces without roughness, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in a gentle and sweet spot, so they become familiar, and have nothing in the way;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cleansed of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and put on the bandages;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full, and attract, if it is the place where one can put a cupping, one puts it, for it is very useful afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the place of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the places are too sore afterwards along the course of the bandages, so soak a linen cloth in cold water, and put on, until the wounds are strengthened;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the wound is multiple, so put on a vitriol ointment, or warts, and similar things, until it is strengthened;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the place of soft peas, and let them until they adhere to the place, it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you are more skilled, take other sinews.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the sinews do not want to take, rub the joint with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so the sinew goes out, and then put them in place, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they cling, sprinkle on a little of aloe and silk threads, or of powder, they will now adhere.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish mirror lies about this chapter, for they did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is strange the science in our land, because I did not find anything good there.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I knew nothing, except by the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom places its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a break or dislocation or twist or fracture occurs to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, so that nothing is lacking to you entirely, as weakness of body, or infants, or old people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the tendons are not very strong, or too fragile;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and avoid eating cold joints, it is to know frozen meats, and flesh of birds and goats, and do not drink wine, nor eat raw fat meat, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you do not doubt about a hot abscess, nor an expansion of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient returns to their first government which they have used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, as if they are strengthened in water, and rice, and bread, and pies, and pork of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and old wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the nourishment represents itself in muscles and soon repairs the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well taken back or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but there is no cure, reset the broken bone with large tendons which are reunited and join the limb together, so that it strengthens as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not touch the entire area of his work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish with thick soups, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a break that goes to the armpit, and another in adjusting, as the handle of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks into a small crack entirely.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner he has his own engine, and his own instrument proper for restoration, according to what the remembrance brings back to its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and appear well by probing, and sound to the pressure of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no sign of fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It does not seem that you move to the hand, but put on medications that come here afterwards, and then hold it subtly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that goes in a curve, and are the two disjointed parts, they must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses come, let them be, as long as they are quiet, until the abscesses subside;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it in a position where you can lift gently and easily, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of one who has broken pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then restrain it, as it must be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it is of two parts, it is by hand or foot, or with your hand if it is small members, or with two cords, or with a cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are dislocated, you reset them by all means in their proper places as you can, and beware that by your work no harm or injury comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if you set it straight beautifully, and do not strain it too much, nor press as those who make them come by their work causing abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, chastise well the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and it is good if the limb is so stabilized that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it's not at all points, and one must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and you ensure it is set straight, so that twisting does not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb's condition is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, like arms and fingers and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	one must envelop them with gentle and subtle drapings;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, like hips and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	one must envelop them with a wide and hard bandage, for wide bands embrace the entire large limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then the interior is stuffed with light poultices, three or four according to the member, and hold your hand a little above all the ligament, then go to the top of the fracture and hold it less, so that the fracture disengages a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the ligament little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another ligament, and turn again towards the broken limb;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first lecture above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the ligaments poultices of linen or drapels, so that it is entirely even, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then place your well-made stitches above, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, apply something soothing to the hot abscess, which reduces the inflammation, and let it be so for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then hold your rods straight, and let them be of the thickness of a large cane reed, or of wood from which one makes writing instruments, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the rod which one places on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it is necessary for the size of the limb, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold the rods as you did at the first bandage, then tie them above with a vein-binding thread, just as at the first bandage on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the more tightly it is bound, the less it will be;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of a single mold;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are large, as I have seen the works of foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted cords, and it is a great error, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that there should be less than two inches of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after being tightened in their healthy places, put beneath them a poultice of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become black.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the courses are broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to tighten the stars all at once on the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put these threads further apart than five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the aposteme that is supervening;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and see here the method of the ancient surgeons for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that holds as by the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg white, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common method of the surgeon restoring fractures in many dispositions, and even for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of restoring plaster for fracture and dislocation and twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	taking Abrams and ladano and enamel and asphaltide and Arabic gum and myrrh, in the name of X;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloe, in the name of V;
alechil VIIII З.;	aloe VIII;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make into powder, and mix with egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the complexion of the man is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is good for many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another way of plaster that is good for twisting:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	taking myrrh and vismalve, in the name of X;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloe, in the name of VIII;
acaice VI З.;	acacia VI;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Here is the translation:
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to reset joints and disjointed bones, and appease the sudden pain, and the cutting of the bone, and the fracture:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take a new linen, and the softness in oil and cooked oil, and put it on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore at first, but it is good to appease the hot abscess, and properly relieve the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to reset which restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	take dry fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to treat for the restoration of the bone fracture and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of violets, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of oats, one part of each;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are cooled, mix it with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of applying a more forceful treatment than the first, when an abscess becomes difficult to restore a limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of violets, and seeds of flax, balusters, melilot, and sage, and flowers of violets and chamomile, one part of each;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and crush, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the cold of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Here is the translation:
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply warm things to the broken member, to restore it, such as a warm poultice, if it is like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of applying it that is good for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mugwort and leaves of decapitated omes, or feathers of a bird, and vasmalve, and make them equal, and crush them, and make an emplaster and put it on the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then lift it up a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has their bone moved out of its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you do not lift it up by hand for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, if you hasten, and lift it up, and remove the emplaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And take a lighter dressing, and a sponge of seawater moist, and dip into water, and lift up the limb, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is appeased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on a dry linen cloth, softened in water or rose oil, and place it on a nut, until you are certain of a warm aposteme.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be removed, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little bit of emplaster, and do not strain it so strongly as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have need of emplaster and bandage, then resume it, as you did initially in equal measure.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if the limb does not respond to what we have said, do not dislocate it further except after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture is evident, and approach the adjustment of the flesh thereto.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then he restrains more than at first, and his flesh swells up, as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the dry place more than master is not, know that nourishments cannot come there;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply the warm water therapy often, every time you dislocate it, and let each tier be a day, and leave it in place for a short while;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work then the nourishments are cut off from the limb, and immediately it seems that they do foolish miracles, which restore the twisted member:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is bad, and if it is a painful work, and I do not see anything else but to soothe the pain and to open it straight away.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are determined;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone breaks all the bone up to the fascia which is beneath the bone, as if it were a hatch or a split;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason it is called this type of breakage "fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Where the spear point touches the bone from above, piercing sense, and is called this type of breakage "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and it is the wound of these two large or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or a split or fracture of the collar bone, or a fall onto stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating wound that approaches just below the skin which is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound that is repelled into the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this breakage "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound that is made by hitting with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of bone go down, and it is like the joints are dislocated as when the joiners set them on their joints;
si entre li piere dedens.	if between the bones within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And it happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, like the head of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and they have all these ways of breaking which small pieces are dislocated if they are like this.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaks through the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into their tendons, and by the rotten flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary similarity is known through this: when one discovers the bone and rubs against it, then the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breaks, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and palpation, and ague fever, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, so that one cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a sudden accident, and you expect health, thus begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nausea comes to you first, and it is in winter, thus you should open your bowels before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, thus hasten to open your bowels before the seventh day, lest the intestine under the bowel be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the break of the bone reaches up to the membrane that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you sew the sewn part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you take hold of the head of the wounded patient, and uncover the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if a flow of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess bursts, then it is necessary that you help with what is needed, and it is that you fill the place with medicated poultices soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and make the wound rest until the bursting abscess is appeased, and be assured of a flow of blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	Then begins the operation on the bone, and it is done according to two manners of work.
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	One manner is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and it is the shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another, larger taillement than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are of iron indeed.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work lightly, so that you do not injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce through gently, so that you do not make too deep incisions with tareres, nor pierce further into the bone beyond the test, and should have a margin or circle above the point, which does not allow the point to pass out of the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you need to have more, if each one returns to its place of the thickness of the bone, so that you have tareres for every test.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and it is the form of three manners of tariffs:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality to perceive around the broken bone is that you put the tariff on the bone, and turn to your fingers as much as you know that the bone is perceived;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then put the tariff in another part a little afterwards, and thus do everything around, then cut into the space of the bone which is between the parts, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you have if you have tenaculum, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and beware that you do not touch the brain nor the vital organs.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have perceived the bone and extracted it, it is fitting that you take the aperteur which is delayed from the bone to all the other instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tender and more subtle than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no useless shells, if they set lightly on one of the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another manner of surgery is that which Galen says, which is more wise;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he praises it greatly, and it is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this curved incision the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut on one side, and the affected part is in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently shape the entire bone around, and beware well of the membrane that is beneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is close to the bone, shape it lightly, for one shapes it with good sense without harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break of the bone does not pass just to the membrane, and the bone is covered so softly above, and there are small pieces, if it behooves to reassemble that roughness, and to remove the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have diverse quantities, in order to prepare each place as conveniently as possible, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use large rasps first, and then more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, you must adjust the cause according to its direction.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and it is a thing which is not properly responded to by one who has placed his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the swelling is discovered, it is necessary that you take the bandage of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another doubled bandage in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first bandage;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and make it as light as possible, so you do not irritate the swelling, then administer from above another ligature, and do not constrict it more than necessary to hold the wound sufficiently;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it be thus for a day or two, until the aposteme's heat is appeased, then remove it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of vegetables, and powder of incense, and aristology, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make powder, and apply it to the wound, and administer then mild medicines without sharp biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and beware that the wound be then clean, so you do not leave any swelling, nor leave it to assemble a bubble, for when a bubble assembles on the surface of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great evil to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one applies to the affected area a biting thing, it increases by degrees above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, lest some bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if it does not flow forth for the medicine that one has applied, which virtue it has, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue it into a plaster, and apply it to the affected area.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal in many ways of cures that are necessary, so that it be healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes the two broken parts above the nail are injured, or one of them by the joint, because they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and that below is cartilaginous, and does not break, if it does not make a swelling or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you apply your little finger or thumb to the nail, and match this break equally with your index finger, and in the pouch by default, until the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your operation.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part near the nail, and cannot be reduced to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a straight finger, a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is of two parts, you make it alike, and hasten to restore it to its original state on the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swollen abscess is appeased, then apply to the head of the nail, stretched with linen threads, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you set a broken bone back in place, hold it steady;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the tendons be so thick that they fill the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say that one must soften the tents in butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it requires that they be moistened with the concoction of egg white and powder of mill.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then let the tendon, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And at no time set an owl's pen or wingbone in place of tendons, and if the drapery is wrapped around, and hold the breakage, and soothe the patient within;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do what you saw.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose as you operate, then put cerotate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a pouch of dyakulon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if apostemes (abscesses) come, apply an emplaster made with flour of sisament, and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the veins.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break is not small, and it breaks into many pieces, if there are suitable instruments available to him, then cauterize the fracture, and treat things that cause bitter pain, and suddenly, as with suitable plasters and ointments available to him.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if he has no denseness in the new wound, so that the treatment of tents, and I put bandages of linen, until he is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no sign of wound above, and the break is above only slightly, and it is not broken in two, because of the corrugations within, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the break is in the left jawbone, put your right index finger, and gently adjust the break, and hold it with the other hand by force, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is dislocated in two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the teeth are moved, or dislocated, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jawbone a waxed cerote, and put on a double bandage.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and place on the drape a well-made large staple, or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and attach it to the muscles that you can, and instruct the patient to relax, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure is changing, then dislocate it again on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply a plaster, made from powder of soft mill flour with abundant egg white or flour of sediment, after that which you have removed the crust.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and apply a light plaster again, and if the plasters stick, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	many times one is healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses arise, so administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a break and wound together, reset the bare bone that has been removed.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtlety of the ostrum makes equal fragile things to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with flame according to the necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the violent one
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The fracture breaks many times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	where it is broken and disarticulated in two, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, if one of them holds the shoulder that feels the broken fracture;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other stretches out the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then put the break in balance with your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have the skill to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be thick according to your need.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and hold steady the forceps, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you set even the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot manage the head of the fracture at the forefront, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and push the ministres down below, so that the bone of the fracture is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then reduce the fracture to your fingers, and if you find the broken pieces, it is necessary that you split apart;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and draw out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then take it to one of the incision makers that you have;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but you put beneath the forceps this instrument, to prevent the blood from flowing:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not at all curved, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the screw;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it has two arms, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, according to the routing of the wound that you have made when you drew out the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if it softens, put a dressing in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straining of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracturing, is that you put on the bone the plaster of powder from a soft mill and egg white, and put light staples on, and put a splint underneath, if you have mastered it;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very wide bandage of a palm's width, then put a double layer of dressing on the staples, and the plaster;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a subtle stick of three fingers in width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage stays in place;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and set the staple on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and below the healthy joint, and below the affected joint;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and the reduction of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture firmly, and you see clearly that the staple does not move above the broken bone, if you rewind it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if you restrain it;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient sit on their back, and place it when he sleeps with a small pillow under the joint, to lift the shoulder high;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if you align the fracture of the forearm by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it until bad accidents do not happen, for up to twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then reapply the plaster, if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it thus, until it is restored;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored to the best within 28 days, and in less than some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Because the spine breaks or dislocates easily, and one cannot know if it is out of place except by touching.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the joint appears according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the limb powdered with millet flour and abundant egg white, and gentle bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on a large and subtle splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and so adjust the splint that it is not crooked in any part of the shoulder, if you use the wrapping of linen bandages, so that the splint is evenly straight.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then bind it all with a strong bandage firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check the dressing every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time he anoints, if he holds back, and puts equal the handle while it is far from its place, and places the patient on his side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or in 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is accomplished, if you dislocate it, and be careful, for it's not the bone that sets easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes beforehand, and does not below the heart, if it swells up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the strong force to calm an abscess down.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the strong push
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The foot is not often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it breaks often at the toes.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken within, it declines to the bottom, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks agility, and walks with difficulty, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the wounds in the broken bone, and feels poorly.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is that the patient puts himself on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the sides of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to put equal in all the ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then set upon emplaustres and estoupes above the subtle thread of salt, or another lighter material, and envelop it in a drapil, and lay it on the broken bone, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and rewind each hour the bandage, and if it becomes relaxed, then hold it fast.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it loosens because of corrosion or pruritus that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and loosen, and raze the emplaustre, and address what has come in ways of cures.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then reset the emplaustre, and hold it steady until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the fracture of the ribs does not come forth unless in the large ones behind the back, and within the head, and they do not feel unless because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and he feels well at the inquisition of the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you make the break even, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so you have mastery of it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breakage of the ribs is declining inward, then the patient feels very great pain, and puncturing, just as in pleurisy, because the bone touches the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and he has spotty pain, and coughs and vomits greatly, shedding much blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great ingenuity.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer food that swells the belly, in order to cure the fracture by blowing.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that some of those whose veins are opened on the body, to suck out the bad humor, and it is similar to reason;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, there is doubt whether the veins attract the excess humors on the body due to the weakness of its disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they direct that one should cover the limb with a warm ointment in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the interlining equal, then let it be cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the bone touching the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to open into the body of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to separate the skin;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then cauterize the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and apply ointments, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses come, put a warm dressing soaked in rose oil on them, and apply it to the affected area.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat meanwhile the area of those who are prone to abscesses, and apply poultices on the affected side where it is needed, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes a fracture comes to the bone at the base of the spine, and it happens that it breaks.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed for you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they move and feel well when they are held firmly and straight, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so put a cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, take heed if the feet are numb, and if the accidents that are in the hands, and on the back there is a lack of vitality and involuntary excretion.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one has swooned onto their belly, if they have a sudden involuntary emission.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is swooning on his back and wants to sit up, it cannot be.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if he does not labor in his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, then it is the thing most lightweight.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that you warm it if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of roses or oil of monk's rue, until it be appeased;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then apply to one of the comforting and drying plaisters, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, until it be healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes dislocated, it is necessary to cover over the short crust.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and reset the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then heal the joining with a poultice, until it be healthy;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you should put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your other hand at your power, then put the emplastrum and the staple on top, so you have mastery;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then hold it in place, and if there is a broken bone, sew it up, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, then there isn't much diminishment at the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and make a long splint, and decline to the affected part, and comes to the patient's pain at the joint, and punctures, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand on top, as long as you are on the breakage;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and he knows what the break and the shape of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is at the top only, set that break even, so that it may be in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is of the long part, or it declines inward, then place the patient on their stomach, as long as the restoration of that fracture may be apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it even, put it on the splint, then put it on a straight stick or pole, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the binding is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if a warm abscess comes, do not touch it, until the warm abscess is softened, and put on what we have mentioned before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, so that there is no bad accident.
et c’est li maniere.	and that's the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breakage of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The joint is what is between the shoulder and the head of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, one should restore it according to one of the two methods.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	where one is to take a full plain of moon grosser, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And lay the chains on the loins, and they are raised high, and thus the patient is seated;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then he throws a broken arm on the stake, until it comes to the axle, and has in the middle a curve of stake, then hangs on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then put the mirrors to the broken arm equal with his hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one supports the patient on his shoulder, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the threads, and each extends to its own part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold the ligature below the breakage, and on the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is close to the head of the shoulder, it should be that you put the molar hinge beneath the axle, and another towards the cot, beneath the break.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and also if the break is towards the cot, it should be to put the hinge lightly, without effort, until the break is even on the limb, and on the cot.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then set an equal fracture, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that abscesses do not form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses form, do not hold steady for less than seven days, and put on a soft linen cloth soaked in rose oil, until the abscesses are calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold steady, and the manner of holding steady is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put on the bandage, and hold steady to the shoulder, and to the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, so nothing deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a straight line, and put on the fracture a stick larger and stronger than the others, and have two inches of space between each stick, and let each stick be so large that it surpasses the fracture by three inches on each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then hold steady on the stiles, thus as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less in aligning.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the positioning of the stiles and the constriction, as we have said, in the process that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if you let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then look for three days at the bond, which you should not inflame in life, lest the nerves cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you approach, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents come, then do not loosen the bond until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and put his hands on his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put beneath the shoulder a cushion flat of woolen cloth, and look every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, nor are the bonds loosened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If you proceed by the virtue of medicine, and give the patient the food that we have presented beforehand, in such a manner that the food be at first subtle;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to take hold, then it should be abundant.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg joints are restored in 40 days of complete rest;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must disarticulate and administer baths and medicines of ointments to the joints to restore them.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the joint is lazy and numb, it takes 10 days or 2 months to disentangle.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "two" "foscile", one of which is small, and it is this one that joins the wrist;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is this one that is below, towards the little finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	perhaps the large "foscile" breaks solely, or the small one, and perhaps both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small fractures are broken, the restorations are light, and the healings;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and worse than when they are broken and assembled together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's a small fracture that is only slightly broken, then you must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it's a large fracture, then it needs to be stretched more strongly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch it on the cushion, and tie the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so the patient does not suffer any strain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then stretch out the ministers like arms to the part below his hand, or to the vein, and another minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he puts his mirrors equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that grips the heart, you cannot restore it to its place, do so according to the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	If you take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And at the beginning of the restoration, abscesses and wounds occur, if you apply a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and you apply the dressing subtly above, so that the abscesses and wounds are appeased.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wax, and apply the plaster of millet powder with a lot of egg white, then put on the staves, and let the stave of the fracture be a bit stronger and a little larger than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it should have six staves or arms in several positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	so let the fracture be in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold more firmly on the fracture than other parts, and tighten less as you go farther away, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages be those that are on the soft and moist bruise, and not hard or dry;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, from which it is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And look after the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, as if a pruritus comes to the limb, it is necessary that you warm the limb with hot water, until the pruritus is alleviated;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb not be tightly restrained.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the bandaging, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, adjust it accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take precautions that the nourishments cannot come to the limb, because it is too narrow, then it is necessary that you soften them a little, and let them thus for some days, until the nourishments are corrected, and then hold steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not undo the dressing for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	where he turns inward, then he puts his hands to his neck, and let his neck be equal, and beware of movement and jerking, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this bruise is restored in 30 days or in 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers having a little fracture, and it does not come but to bend many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient's arm be crossed, and it should be straightened out directly in front of him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and set the mirrors equal, until they are well-jointed;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and the bandages, so that abscesses do not come, then I put a stick according to the quantity of the humor;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is on the outer side of the belly of the sole, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken sole;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then bind with a long bandage, and let the stick be of a gentle strength also as large as the plant of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the breakage is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the hand, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and tighten the ligament between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fracture comes to one of our fingers, it's the swelling, set it even, as it needs.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and hold with the sole, and if you see that you put a small straight stake to lift the fracture, and do not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is in another finger, like in the index or one of the others, set it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that is next to it.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	where you bind them together in holding, what is worth, or you put on a stake, like a swelling.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and suck out what comes from it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the hip is often fractured, and one sees it well when it twists in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is done by binding above the fracture, and another beneath.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	The patient puts his face upwards, then each minister extends his bandage to its equal part;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and it is when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then one of the ligaments will be towards the finger, and the other ligaments below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And thus when it is near the knee, and then the bandages are below the knee, and then the extension is downwards;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then place the mirrors to the bone equally with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if abscesses come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down, then return to your work and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The bandage is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you envelop the fracture with a doubled bandage in two or three layers, and remove the superfluity, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the nail, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and attach the head of the thread above;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then turn around the leg and around the thigh the bandage, then put around the break these, and put a star-shaped thing on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths to make equal the constriction, then start to bind firmly three or four turns around the break;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when you go further up from the break, and constrict less;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take the two heads of thread that you had placed between the leg and the thigh, and bind three of these things that are above, then return to the underside at the head of the thread, until you come to the bottom of the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and constrict, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling or other similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, if he dislocates, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are fragments of bone that prick, one must extract them, if one can;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, one must break the bone, and make a fracture;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the hip joint is broken in this way, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	always, in the restoration made thus, it does not shut in the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is known that the pulse is restored in a day, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee joint there is little breakage, but it often folds.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's not just a crack, or it pierces, and has an open wound, and feels wounded, and this feels very bad.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is done by setting equally what is rounded at its joints, until it is assembled as much as one can.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and put a round stave, if you are a master of it, and hold it as it should be held, then reward all the arrangements that we have said in other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	here is applied to each accident that it suits him, so that he may be healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "muscle", and the other is called "fibula";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and there is a similar fracture as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the equal arm, and the work is all here. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns entirely askew.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is fractured, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain, and it is seen clearly;
et torne desoz.	and it turns awry.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then administer extension, and set it equal, and place the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but always, it suits that the fracture is laid, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is shorter and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and apply the ointment according to its power.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two straight sticks of fir wood that surround the leg from one side and the other, and be about the length of the leg from the knee joint downwards.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap it in two layers of bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle also, and at this ligation do not allow the leg to decline to the right or to the left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and anyone who administers the stick of equal length to the leg, and it is of fir wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly do this in the fracture or where there is a wound.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and examine each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or another accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if he cures until he is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes come with a break and two poisons, and there are only four dispositions for this.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if he has a broken bone in his foot, and you see the bones rubbing against each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and now place your foot on the joint where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their place.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	Then put the plaster and bandages on, and place under the belly of the foot a small tablet at the two flat joints, then hold the foot firmly, then you have enveloped the dressing around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when ten or twelve days will have passed, you should loosen the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are some of the toes broken, restore them, just as we have said about the fingers of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then put on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little larger, then place under the foot that tablet that I mentioned, and hold it firmly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken, set a splint on each joint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the table steady under the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be standing on the edge of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, since we have spoken.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and attend to each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the thigh in a woman is broken, make her sit enlarged, then incline it towards the back of the spine, and hold it from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill in the bag with the nature of the patient's cotton, and put therein as large as I stand.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then undress the woman, and lift the back little by little, and then jumps the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stake.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, if you lift the cloth, and when she has urinated, set it back in place, and do this for seven days or thereabouts:
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	it will restore the fracture, and if you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie it to the perforation with a string, and put all the bladder in the wound;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the string forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the wound will restore the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for several days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the thumb of a man or woman is broken, restore it in the same way as we have said for the bone of the thigh;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these nearby breaks are not hidden from one who applies his study and practice, and heeds my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture, it indicates in several positions the correct way of restoration:
enten le donques.	Then give instructions.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	On the fracture, when it is broken, take a mouthful of oil and anoint the fracture;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap drapels around, and leave it three days or thereabouts, and it will be quickly healed.
de brisure avec plaie	of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is fitting for him who has breakage with wound, especially if it is great, such as the bone of the thigh or of the shoulder or similar, that he be healthy now, so that the healings that we have said testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if the vein of glass, if you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the bruise in the same hour, or that day, so abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, until the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered heart, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extensions are not available to put equal in your hands, then reset with this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight fingers long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary in the mirror that he takes three or four, according to what he needs in each cure of fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be rounded and a little thick, so that it does not bend under the compression on the member in your work, and let it be smooth in front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palsy", because it is necessary that the curved head of the bone be placed on top of the apparent os;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and the joint is once again, so that it regains, and one is equal to the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, it requires that you grasp the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take the handle of an instrument suitable for this, whether it be an incisor or a saw, to your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove what is stuck in the bone of roughness and of small scars.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is rearranged, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If it does so that it is in its place, then moisten it with wine of a black styptic, and properly if it is in this state;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the wound that has oil, lest it cause rot and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer these as you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times they have done this foolishness, and they have brought it upon the patient to death or corruption many a time;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the strappings be more gentle and softer than the other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident has not occurred, as we have said, and you find pain in the limb, then it does not need to be placed on those;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but envelop entirely, in place of these, thick dressings, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see afterwards I or II inflaming the wound, if you remove what you had put on at all cost, and you apply gentle dressings to soothing wounds, as one applies tetrafarmación and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you anoint the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs are wrapped in such a way that the bandage does not press too tightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but rather becomes worse, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with a probe, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the joint, or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it, according to what is stated in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, for many times death ensues, but let it be until it suppurates;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perhaps it will fall out by itself after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound, if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	the bruises that come upon the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come across this after the health of the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a difficult thing to see the shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and sometimes cannot make the limbs perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take heed therefore when it is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer stippling medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and conflate them with wine stippling or with abundant water or with oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put them on the affected area in a poultice, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many hours;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then remove it, and restart with another, until the swelling is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	where you hold onto a well-made wooden splint;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of wood is that it removes all swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the nodulation is already converted into hardness like a stone, and it needs to be removed, so scrape above it, and make the surplus apparent;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	where you take it to a skilled surgeon, until it is removed, and the treatment until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of a limb that is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains afterwards with weak and subtle limbs, it happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, and could not bring nourishment to the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	where for a multitude of arrangements;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	where for too great movements, do not trouble him at his hour;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	where because he has little blood in his body, if it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you should make the patient lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and administer a bath, and give joy and happiness;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply poultice on the limb, if the poultice attracts to the great nourishment, and the arrangement often draws out tedious water, until the nourishment runs to the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and restores it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	because of a twisted limb after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after the restoration, and the broken bones are open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb entirely anew, and many foolish physicians have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this practice is blamed, and great evils come from it, and sometimes death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	however, if the nodations and torments are fresh, it is necessary that they be raised with warm water, or mollifying herbs be applied, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make a mollifying plaster, as one makes diachylon well, and take the mucilage of vismalve, and mix it with grease of goose or oil of sisamont, and apply the plaster thus;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take fat figs, and crush them with flour of Colonne, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And at no time is the node removed by constantly and continually rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let the member be moved gently every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the twistedness is enveloped and hardened, just like a stone, and it needs to be opened with the iron, so it should be covered just up to the bone, at the subtle incision site lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply cauterization and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary to now bring back into alignment.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if we delay, the eyes will inflame, and perhaps by chance they will reset into their proper place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it is not suitable to move it at the hour when it is inflamed:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times it brings on spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	in any case, when this happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the aposteme (abscess) becomes calm;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the member with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each member as the treatment will come into its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the jaws are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocation of the arms is in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	where they are a little out of their joints, and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	where they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its natural positions more easily.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his fingers like a pouch in one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two fingers of the hand be bent back, to make even;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften them, their jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers put it even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the reset is rough, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are washed with warm water and oil, so that they reset lightly;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not delay the reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without becoming soft, then place a moistened cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with many bands.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on their back, and their head be between two pillows, so that they do not move to the right or left, nor exert themselves too much, but take light food, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then advise him to eat lightly, and not struggle much to open his mouth to the morsel and to the drink, so that the jaw be well set and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be adjusted to a point at one hour, and are not converted to their proper places, then fever and excessive sweating come, and by chance a loose bowel, and by chance a vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a perilous condition;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times dies the one who has it, in eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge the rib from its continuity and from the breast, and it is often dislodged at the fracture, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies comfortably on his back, and stretches out his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it tightly;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the head which is towards the side cannot be dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it does not, and if it dislocates again, you should reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it steady, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same is reset the head of the spine, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	because one of them is that it dislocates towards the back part at the joint;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is towards the front of the thigh;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and sometimes it dislocates upwards, and that happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and it does not dislocate backwards because of the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward because of the veins;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often it dislocates downwards towards the joint, especially in those who have little flesh, because for them it happens suddenly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have enough flesh, it pierces at points, and re-enters at points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is inflamed with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is necessary therefore that you test them, as long as you are certain of them;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocations occur when it falls towards the joint, and makes a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the joint, touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bone;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the joint;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not forcing to recall, when it is new, or if the veins are diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient upwards high, then put their fingers underneath the shoulder blade, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the ministers lift the hand, and stretch it upwards, then put it underneath;
si venra hastanment.	if it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the minister applies soothing and calming remedies, such as a decoction of lettuce and fenugreek and melilot in warm water, and it is soothed;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient is laid on their back, and a strip of linen cloth, not too soft nor too hard, is placed underneath the shoulder blade, then the minister places their heel on the strip, and lifts the head of the shoulder strongly, and draws the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister touches the head of the patient, so that he does not move downwards;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see whether it is reset according to this method:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and it is that you make the bone which is more massive than the patient's;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be straight towards the ribcage, and push the shoulder down to the bone of the patient's, and lift the bone high up, so that the patient's arm hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another minister draws the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is as if one fixes a long pole on the ground, so that the head is also straight like a pestle, and neither too large nor too slender;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed under the patient, but so that it has soft drapery above, and the patient is standing straight from the long pole of the beam;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then let his hand be extended downward from the other part in a straight line, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then make this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a stick of two feet in length and four fingers in width, which has the top end rounded to enter obliquely into the hollow of the joint, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then place the top end of the stick wrapped in cloths, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it under the joint of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend the arm along the length of the stick, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair, and let the hand be extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint returns to its place now
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a layer of even linen, then put on top the plaster made from powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg white, across the entire shoulder and around, then hold under the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary to nourish a little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then nourish more afterwards 5 or 7 days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is affected or stretched out or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the chest, and the breasts, or behind, if made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it needs another treatment.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal as long as he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes numbness to the limb, and later on it has difficulty in movement, if the patient bathes many times, so that this numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation where it hurts
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the hip is dislocated to points, and at points returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it is dislocated in all parts, and meanwhile before and behind, and the dislocation is not fully restored, for one sees well and feels well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the injured limb with the healthy one, then it can be seen openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that abscesses do not gather there, for if abscesses gather there, it would be grievous to reset;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is behind;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	if it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is, when it is such that one can reset it, that you extend your hand to your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and his arms should be expansive, and the hands soft in the mirror according to the count of the interior, above and below, and bent the jointure at his fingers assembled, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fixed from the root of the palm the bend that was dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold two ministers, so that it does not move at extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm of each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror joins the jointure to his hand, if you anoint it with some oil to mollify the jointure, then bent the jointure forcibly, until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in its place, if you put a dry plaster on with egg white, and hold it firmly, and bend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then dislocate it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is fixed in its place, then disentangle the ligament, and let it go.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint does not fix well, then reapply the poultice and the ligament, and let it go thus for some days, until it is firmly set;
puis le deslie.	then disentangle it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels grittiness after the reset of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is alleviated;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	where you put on the joint a fatty woolen cloth of sheep, then let it be for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter into a bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the woolen cloth back on, and then enter into a bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and thus do it two or three times until he is healthy;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see that, put a warm poultice of soft butter on it, and hold it in place;
si revenra a sa disposition.	if it returns to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more so than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to return it to its place quickly, in the same way that it was dislocated, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess does not form there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the way to return it is that you put the injured hand on a table, and stretch out the fingers of the hand, and the doctor puts them in alignment, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, you go ahead, it is necessary to examine if it is well in its place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then put the patient's hand on a table at extension and at flexion.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the doctor places his hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then strain the emplasters calming abscesses and let them sense re-commence.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not annoy the patient further unless the hand is numb, and cannot strain anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then know that the nerves are injured, or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy except to strain by cauterization in this case, and by chance it will not be worth anything else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is on the spot, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it thus for a while, then remove it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no grinding, then soak the swollen area in warm water, and rub it so that it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never are the fingers of the hand dislocated to any part, never to the back of the palm or to the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then they are the fingers, and push the dislocation to your pouches as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let it go immediately, and then put it even with that joint;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and bind the limb, as we have said, and release the joint, and make it move, and rebind the limb;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do it often, until it is straight, and do everything thus, if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do everything thus, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	for the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are multiple dislocations, if there is no point of healing, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly burst forth with great force, cannot be held back, and often some member is softened, either the two hips or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the shinbone changes to four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez";
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the treatment is that you should rewarm where the gilbositez has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure or healing of the entire body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falls or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures used big words, where there is no great profit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gilbositez that comes at the worst front, there is no engineer who can heal it;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and thus it is that which comes straight to the II costal, and one cannot cure fevers except that which comes properly to the back, if I say so;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on their face in a level place, and have support beneath him, so he does not slip;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then fix the cushion under the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage beneath the patient's hips, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers should tighten the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two cushions;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well fastened, the cushion as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a tube of three feet in length, and place the tip beneath the patient's back, and let the patient be on their side, and insert the head of the tube beneath the patient's back, then put the middle of the tube on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place the mirrors at their feet on the other end of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, then make it so that the turnet turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fix two tensors at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet two others, and between each tensor, above and below, a palm's width of space;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each tensor a hole, where the turnet runs, and let the tensors be firmly on the ground, so that they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each II of them a torn ligament, for which the torn ligament turns, and has in II turners II small torn ligaments of a palm's length, to turn the turning handle;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the ligament that is among the bones to the turning handle towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turning handle, and each of the ministers turns their turning handle to all the ligaments, and the masters set the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then set on an emplaster of decumatif with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then the stellate of a tablet of three fingers' length, which grips the limb of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle remedies of nourishment, until it is sane;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if some thing comes at the end of the health, it is necessary to administer soothing and softening medicines, with the steel that we have mentioned before;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes I administer on a piece of lead, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back of the dorsal spine, and think that it is dislocations;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have mistaken judgment:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	perhaps it may bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come to be dislocated solely, not so like the other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to three parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	downwards and upwards, and forwards and backwards;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more downwards than the haunches, and a little dislocated forwards and backwards.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the injured knee than the healthy one, and the injured one cannot bend its knee by fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the loosened flesh that is inflamed from a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one who is near death, if it is that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of the one who has it in front, it is that they stretch their leg according to its fulfillment;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	anyway, do not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make it move, it cannot go forward, and holds back its urine, and inflames the groin, and when it goes, it passes over the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who is behind, if it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the level of the ribs beneath the costs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The reminders of this kind of dislocation are that you should rewind if the dislocation is old, and it stays according to its disposition, so there is no cure.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it does not seem that he has a good prognosis.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the three ways of dislocation, if you hurry to put the joint back in place, and stretch it within and without, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	perhaps it will recover, and there is no need for another treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not recover in this way, then you must prepare the limb strongly, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or tie it with a bandage around the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another minister stretches his hand above in this manner so that he presses his hands under his haunches, then tightens a soft bandage around the hip;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another pulls the head of the bandage;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If this does not occur, then one must apply treatment to its similarity.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder, then you must place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the joint that is below the angle, then extend the bandage upwards towards the angle, and towards the strength.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then take another minister by his arms, and embrace the large joint of the hip that is diseased, and extend it to its former shape.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is easier than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong soft bandage on the two heels, and on the two knees, and so the diseased leg is extended two fingers more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let it be hung on a wooden pole, and let it be two cubits above the ground in length.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then instruct the minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let another minister be hung with the patient, who firmly embraces the hip, because the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is in default, thus guide the patient, as we have said in the one who has a clubfoot, and straighten the ligament on the affected leg properly, and on the foot also.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the splint between the hips of the patient in the form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have wet cloths applied around, so that they do not blister the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors place equally with their hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on the table, and press thus as we have said in the gibosity, and adjust the patient to the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and put the fingers of one hand on the affected joint, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is backwards, it is not necessary to stretch the affected part downwards, nor to lift from the ground, but rather it should be as if the joint were dislocated backwards, just as we have said about the positioning on the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it should be on its face, and the bandage stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be at a point when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the hips, and apply the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let it rest for three days or four, then dislodge it, and put the plaster on;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and let it be for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then dislodge it, and make the patient walk gently, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	it is to know, inward and forward, and backward;
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg as they can, and place your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take your knee in your palms, and draw it back between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee in a circular shape.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has well aligned his leg with his hip lightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then remove it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not disturb the patient's pain further, until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not at all, if administration is strongly extended, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it be healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes sprained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the swelling is reduced, and stretch beforehand to the part where it was dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reminiscence is lighter, and one must extend it lightly with their hands when it is slightly swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and hold one minister firmly by the leg, above the swelling.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then prick the foot with your right hand, and then with the left twice, then hold it high, and push the foot up high;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pricking the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, then restart the work, for it returns;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the pillow firmly on the ground between his thighs, and wrap the drapery around, so that the patient does not slip;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then hold the minister's thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot with his hands or with a strap, so that it lies on the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each minister stretches out evenly, and the pillow should be placed between the thighs of the patient to retain the patient when one holds them;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then set the mirrors equal to the dislocation with his hands, and another minister touches the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, set the plaster and bandages above, and hold firmly, and place the foot on the leg, and guard the veins that are on the back of the knee, so that the ligaments do not become too stretched.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments soften, hold it firmly.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	Then loosen it on the third day or on the fourth, and forbid the patient to move for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes beyond that term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses or wounds come, it is necessary that you touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without strain, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the two toes or feet, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and there appears nothing, if you put under the foot a flat table to support the head, then you restrain strongly, and let it be for three days, then you release;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and you have not used it for a long time, and be piteous and merciful and slow, not harsh;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and apply gentle remedies at the beginning of hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the hot abscesses will not return;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is out of place, if you administer soothing remedies to the inflamed abscess, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with dry dressings.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and also with a fracture or breakage, and less severe dislocations, if you reduce the swelling, and do what we have said about simple illnesses.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will be of no value to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body.
