Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis. (Albucasis was a prominent Andalusian physician and surgeon in the medieval Islamic world)
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the final part of the science of medicine, in order to accomplish its end and explain its meaning, it seems to me that I have compiled this treatise for you about the practice with my hand, that is, surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the practice with my hand (surgery) is almost completely extinct in our region and time, so that the science of it is nearly lost and only a few small descriptions remain in the books of the ancients, which have been altered over time and have become obscured, causing the meanings to be hidden and the power and art of it to be weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive the practice of this treatise according to the way of explanation and clarification and summarization; and for that to happen with the forms of cautery instruments and other tools for the work along with an added explanation, which is necessary for preparation.[skipping some lines as they seem repetitive]
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good craftsman with his hand cannot be found in our time is because the art of medicine is long and requires that its practitioner first be trained in the science of anatomy, which Galen states must include knowledge of the joints of members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and have understanding of bones, nerves, and tendons, their number, and function; and of the pulsating and non-pulsating veins, and the locations of their issuing.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says "a name is nothing, but in the work it is something, and even more so in the art of the hand." (meaning that a name or title holds no value if not accompanied by actual skill and knowledge)
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy, it is not unlikely that they will fall into error and cause death in men, as I have seen many times, for some are trained in this science but abandon it, lacking knowledge and experience. [skipping some lines as they seem repetitive]
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who attempted to incise an abscess in a woman's neck, cutting some of the arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out and the woman died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who wanted to extract a stone from a man's bladder, which had grown large and came out along with a piece of the bladder, causing the man to die on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had advised against extracting it, and saw that due to the large size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew that they would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land for surgery, and treated a black castrate who had a fracture in his thigh; the doctor, due to his ignorance, fixed the fracture over the wound with bolsters and splints with great force and did not allow the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he bandaged it according to his desires, and wrapped it, and left it alone for several days and ordered that it be unwrapped; and in this way, the thigh and foot became abscessed, and it led to decay (gangrene).
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I prepared to unwrap the bandages, and achieved calmness and relief from his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But nevertheless, the corruption had already taken hold in the limb, so I was unable to stop it and the decay continued to spread throughout the limb, putting the patient at risk.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who lanced a cancerous abscess and it became ulcerated for several days, until the malignancy of it was greatly increased, causing harm to the patient.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of this is that the cancerous growth is composed of black bile (melancholic humor), therefore it is not necessary to use surgery on the entire area, but rather on the member which can accommodate it entirely.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason, sons, it is necessary that the practice with my hand be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work in which there is danger, even in the best of circumstances.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already discussed throughout this book the operation in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to be aware of this and avoid it, so that the pages do not lead you astray and deceive you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take up your arms with diligence and with the protection of God, and approach your patients with ease and confidence.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best approach by the grace of God to bring about health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to cure, and put aside your weapons from what causes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for more remains for your glory, and it is through this that you will be remembered in the world and after death for your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen also said in some of his monitions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat sick people badly, so that bad doctors are not named."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have now completed this book in three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter deals with the head down to the feet, in the forms of instruments and the iron tools for cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter deals with dryness and perforation, and cupping glasses, and ulcers, and the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and organized by the forms of instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twisting and similar things; a chapter categorized and organized from head to toe, and by the forms of instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cautery with fire and sharp medicine and reminder of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	I am beginning the treatise of this entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary for me to speak of the qualities of the juveniles of that cautery and the noxae (harmful effects) of it, and in what complexion it is forbidden to use cautery.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discourse on the quality of the benefit of cautery and its harm is long and prolix (wordy), subtle by knowledge, and secrets hidden; and many wise men have spoken much about it, and they disagree with each other, and to me falls a small part of their speeches, for fear of being too lengthy.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cautery benefits all complexions universally, whether it is with matter or without matter, except for two complexions which are dry and cold.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and cold complexion with matter (substance), it is contraindicated; for some say that cautery is beneficial for this condition, while others disagree and say the opposite, that it is not suitable for an illness which is caused by coldness and dryness, since fire has a quality of heat and dryness. And it is inappropriate for a cold and dry illness to be treated with something hot and dry (cautery).
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say this to those who disagree (with my previous statement), that through cautery benefit is made in every cold and dry illness that comes in the bodies of men, for when you compare the bodies of humans and their humors to the nature of fire, you find that human bodies are colder.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say for the statement of that (person), I have already experimented with this many times and discovered it.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However, it is not appropriate to speak further on this matter for those who are already proven and practiced in the chapter of cautery through recent experience, and have understood the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of their illnesses, and their causes, and the accidents (symptoms) of them, and the timing of these.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However, in other complexions, there is no fear on your part, especially in hot and moist illnesses, for all doctors agree on these, and they are not discordant on the benefit of cautery in those cases.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing with cautery using fire and its goodness lies only in cautery with burning medicine, because fire is simple, its action only reaches the member that is cauterized, and not the neighboring member, except for a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine reaches those in the members who are adjacent to it (cauterized area), and soon brings to the diseased member a difficult-to-heal disease, and quickly heals it.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, due to its sublime nature and the goodness of its substance, does not do this (cause harm) except that it surpasses (the damage). And already it is known to us through experiment and long practice in studying with art about the truth of the causes; and for this reason, I am excused from the length of the discourse. And if it were not that it is not lawful in my book here to conceal secret knowledge with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies, and its expulsion by which it expels illnesses, demonstrated with philosophical language, which would be useful for your practice.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they (some experts) disagree about the time when it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time to be in the springtime.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is appropriate in all times, because the harm caused by the accidental time (season) is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted with the cautery, especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or causing pain, severe and acute, which do not tolerate delay, so that it is feared that the illness will worsen, which is greater than the small harm caused by the timing.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this does not concern you (the reader), sons, or, it is only believed by the common people and foolish doctors, that at that illness which is healed by cautery is not reduced in severity at all times, and they consider that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the reason is not as they think (the dissenters), because cautery is not only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries up the humors, which are the cause for pain to come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	However, cautery is excessive over medicine due to the strength of its power and the virtue of its operation, and the greatness of its master (the doctor).
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the illness may return in some hour of time, according to the complexion of the patient and the location of their illness, and its strength, and what has been prepared in their body from the accumulation of excesses, and what they have acquired through food and similar causes; unless the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness affecting only a few excesses and humors, such as a toothache or similar conditions. In this case, it is possible that the pain may not return at all, but rather it will be diminished.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And the common saying is that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and this is a correct saying, not in what I understand in it (the phrase), because I believe that there is no healing that benefits from medicine or any other cause more than cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is actually contrary to that; and the meaning of "cautery is the last remedy of medicine" is not what one might think, but rather when we administer methods of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, then at the end of the treatment process cautery is administered, and it benefits.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And so from this it becomes clear that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the meaning which I understand in the common saying and misconceptions of foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients (experienced doctors) said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this without reason, but rather because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And the ancients said that the location of cautery does not matter, as if this were an absolute truth, but I have proven and found that it is not so, for I have observed that it only works in certain bodies, and cautery with this (gold) is good and better than iron, just as they said. However, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not specified how much heat you should use, because the gold melts according to the degree of heat that you desire due to its malleability, and it prepares to receive heat; and if you place ignition on top of it (the gold), it melts and some layers may stick together due to the heat, causing problems for the craftsman.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And so, because of this, cautery is performed with iron more gently and closer to the correct procedure.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have organized this chapter on cautery in accordance with chapters, and I have organized those within the head down to the feet, in order to lighten the burden of asking for information about it (cautery).
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	On cautery for head pain caused by coldness and moisture.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization is beneficial for moisture and coldness in the context of the following accidental cause, which has two causes: the first being inflammation and an abundance of humoral fluids, called "corissa", affecting the head down to the areas around the eyes and ears, leading to excessive sleepiness, toothaches, and migraines, as well as general illness caused by coldness, such as paralysis, inflammation, and apoplexy, among other similar conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method of this cauterization is as follows: first, instruct the patient to cleanse themselves with a laxative medicine, purging the head, for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness, age, and habit of the patient.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	Then, order them to shave their head with a razor and have them lean over a slanted bench, placing their hands on their own chest.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	Then place the edge of your palm on the bridge of the patient's nose, between their eyes.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when you reach the middle location that I mentioned, mark that spot with ink. And then heat up an olive-shaped cautery, which has this form: [The text goes on to describe how the cautery is made and what it looks like, but I will leave that out for brevity.]
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	Then place the cautery on the marked spot and press down gently so that the tissue is slowly constricted, while you rotate the cautery.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	Then lift your hand slightly and check the area, and if you see any amount of bone (like the size of a grain of barley) exposed, then raise your hand and place it back on the iron or another one, if it has cooled down, until you see the bone as I have mentioned to you.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then take a little bit of salt and dissolve it over the area, leaving it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	Then place a piece of linen cloth soaked in balm over it and leave it there until the burn scar has been destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the area with theriaca ointment until it is healed. (Note: Theriaca, also known as Venice treacle, was a compound medicine used in ancient and medieval times.)
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And I have already said that when the Roman fever (probably referring to malaria) breaks out, honey is more beneficial and rejuvenating for the arm. It's not clear from the context why the arm is mentioned specifically, but it might be because the cauterization was performed on the patient's arm or leg. The text seems to imply that applying honey to the affected area can help speed up recovery and provide some kind of rejuvenating effect.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said that in certain cases, the coccyx (tailbone) should be cauterized down to the bone and the cautery should be kept there until some part of the edge of the bone has been burned or cauterized. This suggests that the treatment is being recommended for severe cases where more conservative methods have failed, and the goal is to destroy any infected tissue and promote healing by burning it with a hot iron. The coccyx is a small bone at the base of the spine that can be a source of pain and discomfort if injured or inflamed, so cauterization may have been seen as a drastic but potentially effective way to treat such conditions.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then let the bone be scraped and let it be healed. This suggests that some kind of surgical procedure was performed on the bone, possibly to remove any damaged or infected tissue. After the procedure, the wound would need to be cleaned and allowed to heal naturally.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others said that with the cautery, one should reach as far as the vertebrae, causing deep penetration into the bone until it breaks, and this is the form of an alphecaton (a type of medical instrument): The text goes on to describe how the alphecaton is made and what it looks like, but I will leave that out for brevity.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that from this location (the vertebrae) vapors of the head are expelled. This suggests that the procedure was believed to have a therapeutic effect on the brain and the nervous system, possibly by releasing built-up pressure or toxins in the skull. The idea of "vapors" being released from the body was a common belief in medieval medicine, and it was thought that these vapors could have a significant impact on a person's health and wellbeing. In this case, the procedure was likely intended to promote healing by releasing any harmful vapors that had accumulated in the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the illness be opened for a long time and then let it be cured until it has solidified. This passage suggests that in some cases, an incision or wound was left open for an extended period of time to allow for proper drainage and healing. The text recommends keeping the wound open until it has "consolidated," which could refer to the formation of new tissue or the complete healing of the injury. This type of treatment would have been risky, as leaving a wound open for too long could lead to infection or other complications, but it may have been necessary in cases where there was significant damage to the tissues or structures inside the body.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all cases, but only in certain people due to fear; and let that be better for you, when it is, since the head is made bare by the solution of its continuity, as we have testified in other members, and even more so when the patient's head is of a weak nature. This passage suggests that the author was not a proponent of using cautery in all cases, but rather only in certain situations where it was deemed necessary due to the severity of the illness or injury. The author also acknowledges the risks associated with cauterization, particularly when used on the head, which could lead to further damage and complications if the patient's skull was weak or fragile. Overall, this passage highlights the importance of using caution and discretion when performing medical procedures, and the need to carefully consider the potential risks and benefits before proceeding with treatment.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion; and with that one, let it be done with safety. This passage confirms the author's preference for a more conservative approach to medical treatment, favoring the use of cautery only when necessary and using a method that is less invasive and risky. The author emphasizes the importance of prioritizing patient safety and wellbeing above all else, and advocates for using the most effective and least harmful treatments available.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two. This sentence indicates that the text has moved on to the second chapter or section of the treatise. Each chapter likely focused on a different aspect of medical treatment or procedure, providing detailed instructions and recommendations for practitioners to follow. The use of chapters or sections in medieval medical texts was common practice, as it allowed for easy organization and reference of important information.
Del cauteri del cap.	Chapter two: On the cautery of the head. This chapter title suggests that the text will focus specifically on the use of cautery as a treatment for various conditions affecting the head or skull. The chapter may provide detailed instructions on how to perform the procedure, what type of cautery to use, and when it is appropriate to do so. The author may also discuss any potential risks or complications associated with this type of treatment, and offer alternative methods for treating head injuries or illnesses. Overall, the chapter will likely offer valuable insights into medieval medical practices and beliefs surrounding the use of cautery as a therapeutic intervention.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the entire head of a patient and it persists for a prolonged period of time, and if they have used hellebores, cochias (a type of medication), cataplasms, poultices, ointments, plasters, cupping glasses, gualinas (a type of bandage or dressing), and similar treatments without success, and especially if the patient has already been cauterized with a cautery but it has not helped in any way, then consider that if the patient's head is naturally strong; and is not weak, and there is a significant amount of swelling, then cauterize again using a different type of cautery, but only slightly.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize that (the swelling) on the crown of their head with a cautery until the tailbone is separated. This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of cautery procedure to treat chronic head pain, which involves applying heat to the crown of the patient's head until the tailbone is separated or divided. The purpose of this procedure is not entirely clear, but it may have been believed to promote healing and reduce inflammation in the affected area. The use of a cautery in this context would have been a relatively common practice in medieval medicine, as it was often used to treat various types of injuries and illnesses. However, the passage does not provide any additional details about the type of cautery to be used or how it should be applied, so further interpretation is necessary. Overall, this passage highlights the importance of careful consideration when using medical procedures and interventions, as well as the need for clear communication and instruction in order to ensure safe and effective treatment.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the tailbone and expose the amount of bone that we have mentioned, and then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the location called "vas," which is where a cup is placed (i.e. for cupping therapy). This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of surgical procedure to treat chronic head pain, which involves incising the tailbone and exposing the affected area before applying heat with a cautery. The purpose of this procedure is not explicitly stated, but it may have been believed to promote healing and reduce inflammation in the affected area.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in that (the affected area), and do not expose the bone, because the patient will experience great pain, which is different from the pain caused by other cauteries on the head. This passage suggests that the author is emphasizing the importance of careful technique when using a cautery to treat chronic head pain. Specifically, the author warns against exposing the bone in the affected area, as this can cause significant pain and discomfort for the patient. Instead, the author recommends lifting the hand gently in order to avoid causing further damage or pain.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery should be used in its place, because I believe that the cautery with which one cauterizes the corners of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one with which one cauterizes the middle location of the head; and this is its form. This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of cautery to treat chronic head pain, which is different from the one mentioned in the previous passage. The author notes that this particular cautery is more subtle or refined than other types, and may be better suited for treating certain areas of the head.
Capitol ters.	Chapter three. This passage indicates that the text has moved on to the third chapter or section of the treatise. Each chapter likely focused on a different aspect of medical treatment or procedure, providing detailed instructions and recommendations for practitioners to follow. The use of chapters or sections in medieval medical texts was common practice, as it allowed for easy organization and reference of important information.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Chapter three: On the cauterization of old migraines. This chapter title suggests that the text will focus specifically on the use of cautery as a treatment for migraines, which were believed to be caused by an excess of "humors" in the head or brain. The term "non-antiqua" may refer to a specific type of migraine or headache, although the exact meaning is unclear.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain occurs in the part of the head that is solid (i.e. bone), or if it is a spreading pain around the eye, then let it be evacuated with purgative medicines for the head and let other treatment be administered, which I have mentioned in the sections on diseases; and if all does not help, then cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either with a sharp, burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But a sharp burning cautery is one where you take a piece of steel and sharpen it, then burn the ends of both ends of it with fire. This passage provides more details about one of the methods for cauterization mentioned in the previous passage: using a sharp, burning medicine. The author specifies that this type of cautery involves taking a piece of steel and sharpening it, before heating the ends of both sides over a fire.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then make an incision in the location of the pain in the temples with a lanced (i.e. sharpened) scalpel until it reaches the desired location below the tailbone, where it is hidden. This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of surgical procedure to treat chronic head pain, which involves making an incision in the temple area and then cauterizing the affected area with a sharp, burning medicine or iron. The purpose of this procedure is not explicitly stated, but it may have been believed to promote healing and reduce inflammation in the affected area.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure on it with a tight bandage in order to cause gentle constriction, and leave that on for three hours; and then remove the bandages and let the wound remain open for two or three days, and then place a piece of linen soaked in balm over the affected area until the location heals. This passage suggests that the author is recommending a specific type of aftercare procedure to promote healing and reduce inflammation following cauterization or surgical treatment. The use of a tight bandage would have been a common practice in medieval medicine, as it was believed to help reduce swelling and promote blood flow to the affected area.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the wound with ointment until it heals. This passage suggests that the author is recommending the use of ointment as part of the aftercare procedure for treating chronic head pain. The type of ointment used may have varied depending on the specific needs of the patient or the nature of the injury, but it would have typically been made from a combination of herbs, oils, and other natural ingredients.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do that with some flammable medications which I have written in the two treatises of flammable medications.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But cauterization with iron should be done in this manner: ignite the cautery, which should look like this:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and is called a "clavis" (screw-shaped cautery), because its tip is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and there is a small raised area in the middle of it.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	Then place it on the painful area and hold your hand there so that the artery below is not burned, and slowly rotate the iron continuously.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of tissue burned by the tip of the cautery is as much as its width, raise your hand so that the artery below is not burned, which would cause bleeding.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then soak a piece of linen in saltwater and place it on the area, leaving it there for three days; then apply a moistened poultice with bread and apply ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, cauterize the tip of the scalpel in the same manner as before, and be careful not to cut an artery during this procedure, which is quite ancient.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Chapter Four: On Ancient Cauterization of Emigranea.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat emigranea with the method we mentioned earlier and it is not effective, and sometimes due to the illness, the previous cauterization with medication or fire does not suffice, then it is necessary to ignite a scalpel cautery until it turns white, which means placing it on the area of pain with a line as long as your finger or even longer, and then place your hand there for a moment, pressing firmly enough to cut an artery and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the continuation of the mandible, which can be damaged due to chewing, and avoid burning the ligament and nerves that move it, and prevent spasms from occurring.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And regarding the care and caution required for preventing bleeding from the severed artery, where there is a risk involved, especially for those who are inexperienced and ignorant of what they are doing, it is best to leave the operation to an experienced practitioner.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come back with a reminder of the treatment for bleeding accidents from an artery, in its appropriate place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this illness requires a stronger treatment than the one described and the patient's body can tolerate it, cauterize the area in the middle of the head as we have mentioned, and care for the wound until it heals.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery that we mentioned in the chapter on stretching of the artery with two scalpels, and this is a better and more effective form of cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Chapter Five: On Cauterization for Ear Pain.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When pain in the ear is caused by cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments mentioned earlier, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery called "puncta," which looks like this:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	Then place the puncta cautery near the ear and rotate it around the entire ear as if rolling a wheel, or in the circumference of each section if the pain is located in a specific area.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Move the cautery along the ridge of the ear slowly, carefully marking the location with a gentle touch.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you use the cautery of ten points on the entire ear, and place it there, then care for the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Chapter Six: On Cauterization for Tumors.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Tumors that are cured with cauterization are of the types that come from pus-filled inflammations, as we have mentioned in the section on diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization for the type of tumor caused by dryness or nerve spasms.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat that type of tumor with horehound and caper spurge and guarguarium, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the ridge of the ear, the second a small distance below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place the cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, because softening only occurs in the healthy-looking area that appears to be unharmed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	The method of cauterization is to place the cautery on the right side of the outermost part of the ear, slightly above the temple, and another in the middle, with a length equal to the width of your finger, and then hold the cautery there until it burns an amount equivalent to the tip of your finger.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the shape of the cautery, which is a type of scalpel, and its shape is as follows:
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it is even more subtle than what you see, and it requires a knife with minimal excess thickness.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then care for the area with the following procedure until it heals:
Capitol .vii.	Chapter Seven.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Chapter Seven: On Ancient Cauterization for Apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with the methods we mentioned earlier but see no improvement and the patient has no fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: one on each temple of their head; another in the middle of their forehead as previously described; and a third at the base of their skull.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method for using the cautery is as previously described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And they have already been cauterized near the mouth of the stomach, and it is even more necessary to care for them with proper treatment.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter Eight.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Chapter Eight: On Cauterization for Forgetfulness Caused by Flame.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary to give the patient large doses of herbs and purifying pills at the beginning of treatment.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's entire head and apply a plaster made of centaury, as described in the treatise on plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And leave it on for several days, because this is a method of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do this in the order that I have already described.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so, if they heal well with these methods, then that is good; but if not, then cauterize them with three more cauteries in the lower part of their head, starting at the highest point on the skull and moving down towards the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And leave a space between each cautery as wide as your finger, and care for the cautery with proper treatment as previously described.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you wish to add more cautery and the patient can tolerate it, then do so in the middle of their head, or for even greater effect, cauterize them above both temples.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And care for these areas until they heal, and use olive-shaped cauteries as previously described.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter Nine.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Chapter Nine: On Cauterization for Paralysis and Softening of the Entire Body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary to begin with purification of the head using herbs and other methods as previously described; then shave the patient's head and cauterize them in the middle of their forehead, on both temples, at the base of their skull, and with three cauteries along the vertebrae of their neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if necessary in cases of softening of the body and tolerant patients with severe illness, then cauterize them with four cauteries along the vertebrae of their back, and carefully use the cautery until it has burned deeply into their flesh, lifting only when necessary to avoid burning your own hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And apply a cure to the inside that is healed, and this should be an olive cautery.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic is not cauterized, but only that epilepsy which is caused by a vein.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so it is necessary to cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning of the year and with the other cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severely ill and is tolerant of the administration of medications.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer laxatives and chewable substances that cleanse, beforehand for several days, with improvement of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and each corner of the head is also cauterized.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with cauteries as I have said, having a paralyzing and softening effect on the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let it be an olive cautery as previously mentioned.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery in this way.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Chapter 11: On the Cauterization of Melancholy
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humidity and thick flame, then cauterize that area with the cauteries that we mentioned earlier, while having a paralyzing effect.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that tends toward melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them to drink something that cleanses the brain according to what has been said previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient's head, and then make a decent turtledove from them over the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient should be sixty years old and be able to move about freely.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy to use the fat of old sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And heat that over the fire, tempered by measurement, which the patient will suffer when it is put on them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply that to the middle of their head, in the circle, and let them lie down so that it may be absorbed.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week, along with the other good regimen until they are healed; or if you wish, cauterize that with small points according to its size, but have your hand holding a cautery like this: this is the type of cautery which moistens the brain with evenness.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And apply that piece of linen soaked in bread or wheat flour.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Chapter 12: Cauterization for Water Descending into the Joint
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you notice the onset of water in the joint by the signs I have mentioned in the description, then begin [the treatment] and give the patient a drink that will cleanse their head, and keep them away from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And have them sweat in a bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order the patient to shave their head and cauterize it in the middle of the head with a pointed cautery; and also cauterize both temples if water is beginning to accumulate in both joints, or on one side if it's only in one joint.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Cut all the veins and arteries that are located below the collarbone with a cautery, and let the cauteries be in that area at the same level as the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful not to cause bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see any signs of bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And I will bring wisdom in the extraction of arteries and the removal of those, and caution regarding bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the area below the two skull bones with two specifically produced cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Chapter 13: Cauterization for Old Tears
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When old tears in the eyes persist and are caused by veins and arteries located near the visible part of the head, and it has been verified that this is due to excessive humors, then cauterize the area with a cautery as described in the chapter on water descending into joints. Specifically, use a cautery at the middle of the head, two cauteries at the temples, and two cauteries below the skull bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if necessary, also cauterize the area along the entire side of the eye socket at the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Chapter 14: Cauterization for Foul-Smelling Nasal Discharge
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat the patient with the medication I mentioned earlier and it is not effective, then prepare and administer to the patient crushed ivy leaves for three nights, and shave their head before cauterizing them with a medium-sized olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And also cauterize the area with a nail-shaped cautery, using two cauteries just below the hairline on both eyebrows.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to cut the artery while performing the procedure.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the nail-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Chapter 15: Cautery for Softening Eye Lids of the Eyes
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When an eye lid is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with a crescent-shaped cautery. And this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if necessary, cauterize the area just above the eyebrows with two small cauteries on both sides, and let them be elongated towards the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery correspond to the width of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but only so that the outer third of the eyelid is affected.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Chapter 16: Cautery for the Eye Lid when Hair Grows Inward and Swells the Eyes
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes grow inward and poke the eye, cauterization is required in two ways: either by using fire or by using a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If using a cautery of fire, order the patient to read their eyelashes as if they were reading those that are being cleaned, until they are extended and thinned out; and if it becomes necessary, press on them during their growth to prevent their emergence. Then, strengthen the eyes with a bandage using one wrap around the head to ensure no harm is done while the eyelashes grow back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Once they have grown and thinned out, then place the patient's head in your lap, and gently place a sign on their eyelids using a seal made from a mermaid's leaf, with the beginning of the sign near the eyelashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And apply a bandage soaked in egg white or a paste made from poultry droppings on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply the cautery, the shape of which is as follows:
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize over the mark you have made, gradually, in small stages, until the surface of the skin is burned and appears similar to a myrtle leaf, completely visible and unblemished.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And a sign of healing from this treatment is that you will see the eye lid contracted and the eyelashes raised above the puncture of the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and place over it a bandage with bread to heal the scar.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if the eyelashes return for any reason and the eye lid is softened again, then perform the cautery once more as you did before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the eyelashes are located on the underside of the eye lid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and thinned out so that the eyelashes do not poke the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery using a burning medicine that I command you to do is for the patient to read their eyelashes until they are extended and thinned out, and let it be made from paper or cloth in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take some known soap and crushed chamomile flowers, one ounce each. I would translate the provided line as: "Do that, and quickly mix those causes together, and do it with haste so that they are not cooled down; then spread that (mixture) on a chart made in this way like the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over the wound with both (sides); and place below the wound a piece of linen cloth dipped in albumen of egg white, and the patient's head should be in the direction of the east."
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	"And place the (myrtle leaf) on top of the medicine and press it gently so that it doesn't go in too deep, allowing the patient to feel the bite of the medicine, for its bite is like fire."
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	"And when you perceive that the patient feels the bite, then stop applying the medicine and remove it with your hand; once the bite ceases, leave the medicine in place and wash the wound with water. Then consider whether the eyelid has risen as it should after being washed, due to constriction by fire or incision. If so, then it is well. But if not, return to the area where the medicine did not penetrate, do not degrade your operation and constrict the wound until it heals."
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	"Then place a bandage over the wound until the pus from the abscess has been drained, and then cure it with a suitable ointment or other remedy until it is healed."
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	"And it is necessary for you, in your operation, to exercise vigilant diligence that no residue of the medicine falls into the wound. And if after several days, the eyelid becomes soft and some hairs penetrate into the wound, then reapply the medicine to the area where the eyelid has become soft, just as you did at the beginning, and furthermore, envelop it until it is healed."
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	"And this is the shape of myrtle leaf."
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	"And know that the wounds of men are diverse in size and smallness, and therefore the constriction should be made accordingly."
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	"And let not the way of righteousness be hidden from him who studies this art."
Capitol .xvii.	"Chapter 17."
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	"On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye."
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	"When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the sections on diseases and do not combine your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head towards yours, and let the patient's head be held by some minister between your hands in such a way that he is neither harmed nor agitated by moving his head."
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	"Then place a piece of linen cloth dipped in egg white or muslin over the patient's eye."
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	"Then heat up the cautery which has this shape:"
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	"Which should be concave, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's quill, at one end where the cautery is made."
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	"And if you wish, let it be penetrating at the other end."
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	"And if you want it, let there be a handle like a probe."
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	"However, the one that is concave is better for this work."
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	"Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out its pus and dry it up."
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	"And if it is not open, then you must open it and extract the hardened material from it."
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	"Then place the heated cautery over it and hold it there with your hand, but keep your hand a little way from the cautery of the eye to the part near the nose, so that your hand does not get burned or the patient becomes disturbed. And then apply the cautery to the edges of the wound, breaking up any clotted material."
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so if at the beginning of your cauterization, you manage to enter the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave it like that for three days, and place a wet compress with drying ointment on it until it heals.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it has been passed 11 days and it is not healed, then apply a strong and corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and scraped according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another method of cauterization for a fistula, which was mentioned earlier: understand the location of the fistula and open it up, then place (the cautery) in that opening with great care, its shape being like this: and make it the size of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand over it with a cloth so as not to harm the patient from the heat of the melted lead; and it is necessary to apply it on the skin of the patient, covered in albumen of egg or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it with miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with the cautery and treatment as we have mentioned, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a tracheotomy and lead the fistula into the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	On the cauterization of wounds on the feet.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times, cuts and tears occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And so when you treat those cuts and tears with what we have said in the previous sections and it does not improve, then use fire to cauterize them with a small knife according to this method that is taught:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its cavity be according to the fineness of the knife (blade).
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then carefully place the point of the cautery in those cuts and tears until it reaches the root (base) of them.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then treat it with wax until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess appears in the root of the uvula or on the palate or between teeth and it develops into a fistula, and you treat it but it does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the fistula according to its size with fire and place the burning iron in the hole (opening) of the fistula, holding your hand until the hot iron reaches the base of it; and do this one or two times; then treat it with the treatment we have mentioned until it heals.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the abscess is cut off and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to reveal the location and clean out the rotten bone according to what will be mentioned in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	On the cauterization of teeth and softening of gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth become rotten, and you treat them with medicines without success, then place the patient's head on your lap, and use the cautery in the form that will come next, quickly placing its point over the tooth and inserting it into the opening of the tooth with great care until the patient can no longer bear the heat.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then quickly remove your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as needed.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient fill their mouth with salty water and keep it there for an hour, then spit it out, for the rotten tooth is solidified and the softened gum is strengthened, and the moisture that causes corruption is dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the cauterization of tooth pain
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is caused by coldness or there is a crack or worm in it and treatment with medicine does not bring relief, then cauterize the tooth using one of two methods: cauterization with cow dung or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with cow dung is done by taking some dung from a cow and shaping it on the tip of an iron, then wrapping it in cloth and placing it in boiling water until it is heated, and quickly place it over the painful tooth until it cools down.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then repeat this several times until the heat of the cautery reaches the root of the teeth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, submerge wool or cloth in the cow dung and place it over the painful tooth and hold the hot iron until it reaches the base of the concavity of the tooth.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cauterization with fire requires you to use an iron or copper point and it should be of a certain thickness, and the intensity of the heat should not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then heat the iron cautery in the shape that will come next and place it over the tooth, holding your hand until the cautery cools down; do this several times until the pain is relieved within that day or the following day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And it is necessary to have the patient fill their mouth with good dung and hold it there for an hour, then spit it out; this is the shape of the cautery.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize with whatever you wish at its end, as much as is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the cauterization of umbilical hernia
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When umbilical hernia is caused by cold and moist humors and does not respond to gentle digestion through medicines and you wish to perform gentle digestion on it, then heat the concave cautery in this shape that has two sharp ends so that smoke comes out of one end while heating the other, place the hot cautery over the abscess once or more if needed until it reaches the base.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then apply cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place a compress soaked in bounded borax on the burnt area until it dries out what the fire has burned.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with ointment, dressings and cloth while it heals.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or cautery should be as follows.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	On the cauterization of laryngitis and constriction of the throat.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When humidity comes to the lung canal and especially when it is accompanied by congestion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the veins in the area of the throat where they are swollen.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And make sure that you do not reach the windpipe with the cautery or burn the patient's spine, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that area again with another cautery on the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of the patient's spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery of the previous shape be used for this procedure.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with what has been previously mentioned until it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	On the cauterization of lung disease and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, and the patient does not have a fever or consumption, but rather an old condition, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone in the affected areas of the lungs and boils; and another cautery between the nipples in the middle of the chest; and let the cauteries be shaped as before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if desired, let the cauterization be punctate with the cautery that is called "puncta", the shape of which was previously described in the treatment for ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make holes in those; and then cure it with what was previously mentioned until it heals.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cauteries have three branches, for cauterization is done with that: with one blow, you can make three cauterizations in this shape.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	On the cauterization of titillicus, which is the head of a tumor.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the tumor is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not return to its normal position when it should, then you must first reduce the dislocation, and then have the patient lie on their back or side; and then raise the neck which is located in the rear part of the tumor towards the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand if the joint is dislocated to the rear.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the cautery with two heads, and this is its shape.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the spine until it penetrates into the other side, and this will create a shape of cauterization with four heads.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be fine according to the size of the tumor; and this is its shape.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is necessary to adjust according to this count and for that reason there are eight cauteries.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then place a porous cushion with salt on the cautery and have the patient rest in peace and quiet so that the member is not harmed for some time until it heals.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and is not corrected quickly, then cauterize over the muscle with a pointed cautery or multiple punctate cauteries, for the joint will be strengthened, the humidity will be dried out, and the patient will be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	On the cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there is cold and excessive humidity in the stomach which has spread throughout its contents and multiplied, and if you continue with the usual treatments without success, then have the patient lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and cauterize the area with three cauteries: one below the navel by a finger's width using a pointed cautery, and two more cauteries below each side of the ribcage, creating a triangular shape; make sure to leave space between them so that they do not touch and form pus.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of a spine.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in this addition. If desired, use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach with this shape, and let it be circular as shown in this shape.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized with punctate cautery for those who are afraid of it: and know that you should place the cautery points on the stomach according to the desired size, and then use a pointed cautery at those points. Afterwards, cure it using the previously mentioned treatment until it heals.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	On the cauterization of a cold liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When there is pain in the liver due to cold or humidity or excessive flatulence which has caused it to deviate from its normal condition through superfluous egression, and if the usual treatments are unsuccessful, then have the patient lie on their back with their hips elevated, and cauterize three points on the liver below the hypochondriac region according to this shape and quantity, so that it aligns with the position of a man lying down.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be as long as a straight body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press too hard with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of cautery needed is equal to the width of a spine and cannot be accommodated; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if not standing, then let them sit with their legs extended, and raise their arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel, if you have the skill and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, ensuring that the width of the entire spine is cauterized so that the entire body is affected and reaches the intestines, as the spine is delicate here; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	On the perforation of liver abscesses with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When an abscess or tumor develops in the liver and you want to determine if it is located in the liver tissue or its membrane, then if it is located in the liver tissue, the patient will experience heaviness and dull pain without worsening.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is located in the membrane of the liver, then there will be severe and frequent pain which often exhausts doctors trying to cure it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore the patient must lie on their back and you should touch the location of the abscess with your fingers. Then heat the cautery which is shaped like a needle, as previously described in the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And then use that needle-shaped cautery to burn along the entire length of the spine until it reaches the diaphragm, continuing until pus forms.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with the same treatment used for other abscesses until it heals.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this type of cautery unless the practitioner has extensive experience in medical studies and has recognized many diseases through it; but for this operation, some experimentation should be attempted with caution. However, it is better if you leave it to those who are more skilled.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	On the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients used to cauterize pleurisy by making incisions in the ribs according to this method: take a dry, pointed rib bone that is about as thick as your finger and of sufficient length.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then immerse that bone in oil and heat it over a fire until it becomes a cautery. And then use this cautery to make incisions in the following locations: one incision between the continuation of the collarbone and neck; two small incisions, slightly declining towards the area below the chin, under the beard; two more incisions, slightly declining between the fifth rib and spine, at the back; another incision in the middle of the navel; another on the stomach; three incisions at the back, one incision between the shoulder blades; and two small incisions under each side of the hips, after the cautery between the shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary to burn your hand with the cautery, but rather hold it near the skin.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And ancient men used a type of cautery that resembles a ray and applies it to the skin, placing it in the location between the ribs until it reaches the abscess and pushes out the collected pus, just as we mentioned in the abscess of the liver.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with cautery, there is no fear, because one dies immediately if it happens in the location of a fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the illness of the spleen with what we have said about the treatment in the division and do not change your treatment, then cauterization should be done in three ways, all of which are correct: one is to make three or four punctures according to the length of the spleen, similar to the shape of the liver cauteries, whose figure has been mentioned before.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let the width between each cautery be the size of a finger or a little more, and the manner of cauterization should be the same as we mentioned in the liver cauteries.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not burn your hand with the cautery; and let the patient be lying on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is to heat the cautery with two turns, as we mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and raise the right rib cage that lies over the place where the spleen is located when the patient lies on their left side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your lifting (of the rib cage) be according to the length of the body so that punctures can be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two turns (of the cautery), just heating it, in that place where you have penetrated the rib cage from the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then extract the cautery; and thus four punctures are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three turns.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And take care to cure the cautery that has not shed pus for many days, because this cause is more favorable than the previous ones in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Chapter 31: On Cauterization for Hydropsy (Dropsy)
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery should not be used in cases of hydropsy, but rather in certain types of abscesses specifically.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When treating hydropsy with the methods of treatment we have mentioned in the division and you do not change your treatment, then it is appropriate to cauterize in the following way: four punctures around the abscess, one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the ribs.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And let the cautery remain open so that it sheds pus for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from treatment after cauterization, because it is necessary to add two intentions (i.e., therapeutic methods) to aid in the healing process.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used to cauterize the abdomen should be like a nail, according to its previously described form, and the one used to cauterize the back should be olive-shaped, as was previously described in its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Chapter 32: On Cauterization for the Feet and Thighs
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are affected by abscesses in hydropsy and are filled with yellow water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular (i.e., near the ankle) and anular (i.e., near the heel) bones, holding the cautery with your hand without twisting it; and then raise your hand while not completely returning it, as the yellow water will be released.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	The cautery should be shaped as follows: And then make two cauteries on each thigh, and in each thigh, make a cautery with the tip of the knife-shaped cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cauteries be according to the length of the thigh, with one below the knee and the other below the middle part of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open without treatment for a long time so that some water drains from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And treat it with the causes we mentioned earlier.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Chapter 33: On Cauterization for Abdominal Diseases
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is weakened and damp due to an imbalance of the digestive and retentive faculties, which are located in the stomach and intestines, it can be treated with the following methods: If the patient is able to tolerate a strong cautery that promotes heat, then use a large cautery on their stomach as described earlier in the chapter on cauterization of the stomach, along with a circular cautery and four fine punctures around the abscess. Additionally, use a fine nail-shaped cautery and one or two cauteries over the liver (i.e., hepatic region) to promote heat and drying.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the dampness is excessive and the patient can tolerate it, then use the cautery on the navel and intestines, and gently place two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal regions (i.e., groin area). This treatment will perfectly aid in healing without causing harm.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Chapter 34: On Cauterization for Chronic Hemorrhoids
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When chronic hemorrhoids are caused by thick and damp humors or corrupted fluids, and they have been treated with the methods we mentioned earlier but still persist, then use three cauteries over the pus below the small triangular spine of the lower back, and use one cautery above the navel (i.e., umbilicus) that is shaped like a small triangular point.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach is weakened and the food is not being digested properly, and the skin appears inflamed or abscessed, then use a large cautery over the stomach as described earlier; and use one cautery over the liver (i.e., hepatic region) and another cautery over the spleen, both shaped like nails, to promote heat and drying. Leave the cauteries in place for some time to allow them to drain any excess fluids, and continue treating the patient until they are fully recovered.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of abscesses near the removal of pus.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you lance an abscess, then apply the cautery which is similar to a spear.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then introduce the flame of the cautery into the lanced abscess and advance your finger inward until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if there are many abscesses, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and treat those with ointments until they heal.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on a significant area, it is more beneficial in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the nature below the parts of the body.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the operation that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal with cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when one sees a fistula in the nature below that is old and has corrupt pus and moisture within, it is better to treat it with subtle incisions and cautiously probe its depth using the previously mentioned method.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then apply the cautery which is similar to a spear.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And then introduce the cautery, which has been lit, into this fistula, according to the depth that was probed by the instrument.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And move the cautery over it until the corrupt parts are burned one or two or three times, depending on how much is necessary.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn nerves or veins, and if the fistula leads to the bladder or intestines, then avoid those areas; do this only when the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating deep.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And treat the area until it heals.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the wound is sealed and the pus-filled matter has been drained from it and remains in that state for a long time, then know that it is fully healed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the pus-filled matter is not drained from it, then know that it is penetrating or infected with corrupt bone, or this occurs due to one of those causes which will be mentioned in their place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the cauterization of tumors.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When tumors become painful due to inflammation or swelling and as a result, the patient is in distress, then it is necessary to cauterize each one of them with a pointed cautery that leaves a scar, so that it will not be reactivated again.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And quickly cauterize with a light touch and leave a small mark, for three linear cauteries will form, which will be more beneficial in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38:
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When weakness and softening occurs in the bladder due to inflammation and moisture, resulting in the patient being unable to retain urine, then cauterize that area below the bladder where the pubic hair begins, with a cautery on each side of it.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And let the length of each cautery correspond to the size of the bladder; and cauterize that area below the spine with a cautery or two if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be pointed as described before.
Capitol .xxxix.	It seems there is a mistake in the chapter number, it should be:
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the cauterization of the rectum.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When inflammation and moisture occur in the rectum, resulting in difficulty with insertion and menstrual bleeding being corrupt and delayed, and pain occurs upon their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize that area with three circular cauteries around the navel as previously described; and also cauterize the area below the spine or use two if necessary, and let the cautery be pointed.
Capitol .xl.	It seems there is a mistake in the chapter number, it should be:
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of cauterization in the case of dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist abscesses have infiltrated the area of the ankle, and this has caused it to become dislocated from its place, a sign of this is that one thigh appears longer than the other when compared with each other.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found by where the swelling is.[](https://llmmyy.com/)
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle with a circular cautery, as you will have marked in the circumference of the affected area, so that the affected area falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the form of the cautery be as described in the cauterization of the stomach. (This suggests that the text refers to a specific type or shape of cautery instrument, previously described in another section of the treatise.)
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not available to you, then use three large olive-shaped cauteries instead. (This suggests that the text recommends using a different type or shape of cautery instrument when the one previously mentioned is not available.)
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the thickness of the entire muscle tendon, and take care that it heals properly. (This suggests that the text recommends adjusting the size or depth of the cautery based on the specific injury being treated.)
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41. (The numbering system used in this treatise is not clear, but it appears to be using Roman numerals for chapters. Therefore, this would be the title of chapter 41.)
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of cauterization in the case of sciatic vein. (This suggests that the text is describing a medical procedure to treat an injury or condition related to the sciatic vein, which runs from the lower back down to the leg.)
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle area and is caused by moisture and cold, then the patient is treated with what we have said before, and that is to use a warm compress or poultice, but if this does not work, then it is necessary to drain the patient of thick humors using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills, and then cauterize the area. (This suggests that the text recommends a multi-step treatment approach for ankle pain, starting with more conservative treatments like warm compresses and moving on to more invasive procedures like cauterization if those do not provide relief.)
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the method of cauterization in this case is done in two ways: either with burning medicines or with fire. (This suggests that there are different techniques for cauterization, and that the text will go on to describe these methods in more detail.)
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The first method is done in two ways, of which one is to cauterize the area around the ankle with three triangular cauteries, as shown in this diagram, and to do so with sufficient depth. (This suggests that the text includes a diagram or illustration that shows the specific shape and placement of the cautery instruments to be used.)[/
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the spaces between each cautery be the width of a finger, and let the olive-shaped or large cauteries be used. (This suggests that the text provides specific measurements or guidelines for how far apart to place the cautery instruments.)
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	But sometimes it may be necessary to make some of the cauteries on the middle of the ankle, in which case there will be four cauteries. (This suggests that the text acknowledges that different cases may require variations on the basic technique.)
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you prefer, you can cauterize with the circle that was described in the section on treating dislocations of the ankle, provided that it encircles and burns the entire thickness of the muscle tendon. (This suggests that the text is referring to a specific type or shape of cautery instrument, previously described in another section of the treatise.)
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cauterization for sciatica when pain is localized to the ankle and does not extend further into the thigh. (This suggests that the text is describing a specific type of sciatic pain, and providing guidelines for how to treat it with cauterization.)
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if the pain extends into the thigh, then you should cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where the patient complains of pain, and one cautery on the shin a little above the middle of it. (This suggests that the text is providing different guidelines for how to treat sciatic pain depending on its location and severity.) [
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cauteries are knife-shaped, then let the depth of the cautery correspond to the thickness of the muscle tendon. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to adjust the technique depending on the type and shape of cautery instrument used.)
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient complains that the pain extends to the lower leg or feet, then you should cauterize with three or four points or more if necessary in the location where the patient indicates pain. (This suggests that the text is providing guidelines for how to treat sciatic pain that radiates down the leg and into the foot.)
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient complains of pain below the knee and towards the thigh, then you should cauterize with a knife-shaped cautery. (This suggests that the text is providing guidelines for how to treat sciatic pain in different locations along the leg.)
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in all cases of cauterization, be careful not to burn too deeply with the cautery and damage nerves or large blood vessels, as this can cause further harm or complications for the patient. (This suggests that the text acknowledges potential risks associated with cauterization, and provides guidelines for avoiding these risks.)
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some who have cauterized on the shin and burned too deeply during the procedure, causing the leg to swell with inflammation all the way up to the thigh, and in some cases resulting in a perforated and infected foot. (This suggests that the text includes personal observations or anecdotes based on the author's own experience as a medical practitioner.)
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And this can lead to severe abdominal pain and even death. (This suggests that the text recognizes that cauterization is not without risks, and emphasizes the importance of using proper technique and avoiding over-cauterization.)
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain occurs in two locations simultaneously, then you should cauterize each location using this method. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to treat multiple areas of pain at once.)
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And wise men have said that in the cauterization of ankle pain, this is the method: make a circle of iron with a circumference the size of a palm, and let the diameter be the size of a date seed or slightly smaller. (This suggests that the text includes recommendations from other medical authorities on the use of specific types and sizes of cautery instruments.) [
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And inside this circle there should be another third of the same size, and let the spaces between these circles be the width of a nut. These circles should be open on both sides, and their length should be one or two nuts long, with the edges of the iron appropriately prepared for use in these circles. This is the shape of it: (This suggests that the text includes specific guidelines for how to prepare and use cautery instruments, including measurements and shapes.)
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	And when it has been heated in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, then place it on the affected area of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. (This suggests that the text includes detailed instructions for how to use cautery instruments during medical procedures.)
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize with three circular cauteries in one movement. (This suggests that the text recommends using multiple cauteries at once to treat a single injury or condition.) [
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days, and apply an ointment to the wound after that and keep it open for several days. Then treat it with a plaster until it heals completely. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to care for a patient's injury or condition after cauterization has been performed.)
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	And Albucasis says: "O sons, we have little experience with this type of cautery due to its terrifying appearance, and because few people have the skill and knowledge required to use it effectively." (This suggests that the text includes quotes or references from medical authorities such as Albucasis, a prominent Islamic physician known for his contributions to surgical techniques.)
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But of all the cauteries that exist, those who can endure it will find relief with this one, and it will be effective for treating their condition. (This suggests that the text emphasizes the importance of using proper technique and caution when performing cauterization, but also acknowledges its potential benefits for patients.)
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But a cautery with adherent medicines is one in which you make two circles with holes for the insertion of the iron handle, like this: let the length of each side be the size of two nuts or more. (This suggests that the text provides instructions for creating a specific type of cautery instrument using metal and other materials.) [
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And let the spaces between each circle be the width of a finger, and let them be open on both sides, and fit together as follows: (This suggests that the text includes specific guidelines for how to create and use cautery instruments, including measurements and shapes.) [
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place the cautery on the affected area of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side, and apply pressure to the area with your hand. Pour warm water between the two circles, gradually increasing the heat, and hold it there for the duration of one hour, allowing the patient to endure the biting and sticking sensation that comes from the cautery (which feels similar to burning) until the pain subsides. (This suggests that the text includes detailed instructions for how to perform cauterization during medical procedures.)
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and clean away all the warm water from the entire area of the ankle with clean water. (This suggests that the text includes guidelines for how to clean and care for a patient's injury or condition after cauterization has been performed.)
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave it for three days and apply an ointment to the wound until the blackness of the cautery has faded, and leave it alone for several more days, allowing the pus to drain away, which is a sign that the healing process has begun. This is the final step in treatment. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to care for a patient's injury or condition after cauterization has been performed.) [
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat it with ointment until it heals completely. (This suggests that the text includes guidelines for how to care for a patient's injury or condition after cauterization has been performed, emphasizing the importance of ongoing treatment and monitoring.)
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, create a similar device that can contain water, as is done with the ankle. (This suggests that the text provides guidelines for how to treat sciatic pain in different locations along the leg, using devices containing warm water to apply heat and relieve inflammation.) [
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of using warm water, which I have already described in the section on refining medicines. (This suggests that the text includes cross-references to other sections or chapters, indicating that it is part of a larger medical treatise or compilation.)
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Here is a recipe for alkali and nitric acid, equal parts of each, mixed together and then strained into a new container with a small hole in the bottom, just large enough to allow the mixture to flow out slowly. (This suggests that the text includes specific instructions for how to prepare and use different types of medicines or medical treatments.) [
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And then place the container on top of another container that has been filled with warm water. Slowly pour the alkali and nitric acid mixture into this warm water, stirring constantly as you do so. Use your free hand to press down on the mixture, ensuring that it is well-mixed and evenly distributed in the water. After a few minutes, remove the container from the water and let the mixture stand for several hours before using it to treat the affected area. (This suggests that the text includes detailed instructions for how to prepare and use different types of medicines or medical treatments.)
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then pour the remaining water into a new container with fresh nitric acid and alkali, which will now have a much stronger potency. This mixture can be used in many different medical procedures and in cauterization of other parts of the body, as it has the power to heal through fire. (This suggests that the text includes guidelines for how to use specific medicines or treatments in various medical contexts.)
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some of the medicines that are used for cauterization include things like zinc oxide, crushed honey, and soap mixed together. (This suggests that the text includes a list or inventory of different types of medicines or medical treatments, along with guidelines for how to use them in specific contexts.) [
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen speaks of a procedure and treatment for joint pain and sciatic nerve pain that he learned from an ancient physician, which he highly praises as being very effective. He says that there is no need for any other treatment, as this one alone has cured many people in the past, and they have been completely healed after just one session, finding relief from their pain quickly and easily through this method. (This suggests that the text includes references to medical authorities such as Galen, who are known for their expertise and contributions to medical knowledge.) [
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And let it be made with vertigris, if possible, and if not, then use fresh figs instead, which should be crushed together with a small amount of powdered glass, and then applied to the ankle (or thigh or leg) where there is pain, and bound in place. (This suggests that the text includes specific instructions for how to prepare and apply different types of medicines or treatments.) [
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And let it (the cushion) be placed for a duration of three hours or for as long as the patient can tolerate the pressure.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	Then immerse that part in a bath, and when the body has become warm, place it on the ground, as this will stop the pain and promote healing.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines, except in cases of evacuation of the body (i.e., purging).[Answer 4:
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Hippocrates says that when the stretched vein is cauterized at the time of a goat's horn incision, it will greatly benefit the patient. And the cautery should be applied in the following manner: take some wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes and between the heel and the ankle.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then take a dry goat's horn and heat it over a fire until it becomes charcoal. Place this charcoal on the wool and leave it there until it has been fully absorbed. (Note: The text suggests that the heated goat's horn will turn into charcoal, but this is not accurate as a horn does not transform into charcoal when burned.)
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	Then repeat this process, and do not stop until you feel the sensation of the bite (i.e., the heat) reach the ankle, and the pain will subside.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called "cautery of cows." (Note: It is unclear why it is called this, as the text does not mention cows in the previous sentences.)
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42. (This is a heading indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the text.)
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	"On the Cautery Treatment for Toothache." (Note: The word "dos" in this context means "tooth" in Old French, and the chapter discusses the use of cautery to treat tooth pain.)
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes toothache can be caused by various factors such as decay or trauma, excessive eruption, or other similar causes, and also due to the infusion of damp and cold matter.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery is only indicated in this particular case, which is caused by the effusion of damp matter. (Note: The text suggests that cautery should be used only for this specific type of toothache, which is caused by the infusion of cold and damp matter.)
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, in order to evacuate the patient of this damp matter, make three pills that are similar to it, and place them on the tooth where the pain is, making an incision with a cautery tool in each line. The depth of the incision should be determined by the tolerance of the patient and the strength of the cautery tool. (Note: The text suggests using a cautery tool to make three incisions on the affected tooth, and adjusting the depth of the incisions based on the patient's pain tolerance and the strength of the cautery tool.)
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And then perform cauterization using a pointed cautery tool. (Note: The text suggests that a pointed cautery tool should be used to make the incisions on the affected tooth, rather than a flat or rounded tool.)
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, you can perform cauterization using three or four pointed cautery tools in this manner:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43 (This is a heading indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the text.)
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	"On the Cautery Treatment for the Beginning of Glandular Swelling." (Note: The term "gilbositat" is used to refer to a swelling or inflammation in Old French, and this chapter discusses the use of cautery as a treatment for early-stage glandular swelling.)
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This disease often affects young children, and the sign of its onset in children is that they experience pain or stiffness in their neck, especially when looking up or moving their head. (Note: The text suggests that this condition, which causes swelling or inflammation, can affect young children, and one of the early signs of the disease is stiffness or pain in the neck.)
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find it (the inflammation) in the lower vertebra of the spine, and in the nodes that are beginning to protrude above the other vertebrae. (Note: The text suggests that the inflammation can be found in the lower part of the spine, specifically in the vertebrae where the swelling is starting to become noticeable.)
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you see this (the swelling) and wish to prevent it from getting worse, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery tool in this manner:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that the cautery covers the entire surface of the affected vertebra. (Note: The text suggests that the circular cautery tool should be used to cover the entire surface of the affected vertebra, ensuring complete cauterization of the area.)
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, you can also use a pointed cautery tool to make two or three incisions along the circumference of the vertebra. (Note: The text suggests that in addition to using a circular cautery tool, one can also use a pointed cautery tool to make multiple incisions along the circumference of the affected vertebra, further ensuring complete cauterization.)
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close together. (Note: The text suggests that when using a pointed cautery tool to make multiple incisions along the circumference of the affected vertebra, the incisions should be close together to ensure thorough cauterization of the area.)
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then care for the area until it has healed completely using the methods we have described. (Note: The text suggests that after performing the cauterization, one should continue to care for the affected area, following the previously described methods, until it has fully healed.)
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful not to use cautery in cases of glandular swelling that is caused by nerve spasms. (Note: The text suggests that caution should be taken when using cautery, and it should not be used in cases where the swelling or inflammation is caused by a nerve spasm.)
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44 (This is a heading indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the text.)
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	"On the Cautery Treatment for Gout and Joint Pain." (Note: The term "podagra" is used to refer to gout, a type of arthritis that causes severe pain in the joints, particularly the big toe. This chapter discusses the use of cautery as a treatment for gout and other forms of joint pain.)
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that have infiltrated each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. (Note: The text suggests that joint pain can be caused by cold humors that have penetrated the body, and when this happens specifically in the feet, it is referred to as "podragua" or gout.)
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, when gout caused by cold humors has been cured through the method of treatment and the pain is not recurring, then use cautery to prevent its return. (Note: The text suggests that when gout caused by cold humors has been successfully treated using the described methods, one can use cautery as a preventative measure to avoid future occurrences.) [Answer 16:
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you perform cautery at the site of evacuation around the circumference of the joint in the foot with many cautery tools. (Note: The text suggests that when using cautery to prevent the return of gout, one should use multiple cautery tools to create many incisions around the affected joint in the foot.)
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be an olive-shaped cautery tool with this shape:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery tool. (Note: The text suggests that when treating joint pain or gout in the feet, one can use a pointed cautery tool to create incisions as needed.)
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pain rises into the toes or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each painful area with three or four incisions around it using the olive-shaped cautery tool. (Note: The text suggests that when treating joint pain in the feet or other areas, one can use an olive-shaped cautery tool to create multiple incisions around the affected area, ensuring thorough treatment.) [Answer 21:
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cautery tools are necessary for you, then cauterize (the area) with them and do not press too hard with the cautery tool beforehand, but only to the extent of the width of a hazelnut. (Note: The text suggests that when using multiple cautery tools to treat joint pain or gout, one should use caution to avoid over-application, and to limit the amount of pressure applied during treatment.)
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain rises into the toe and back, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter. (Note: The text suggests that when treating joint pain or gout that has spread to multiple areas, one should follow the previously described methods for cauterization, ensuring thorough treatment of each affected area.)
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pain is only in the fingers and is called "suagra," then make incisions around the circumference of the knuckles where they bend, making two lines. (Note: The text suggests that when treating finger pain or arthritis known as "suagra," one can use a pointed cautery tool to create multiple incisions around the knuckles, ensuring thorough treatment.) [Answer 25:
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if pain remains in the fingers, then make incisions around the circumference of each knuckle and on the fingertips. (Note: The text suggests that when treating finger pain or arthritis known as "suagra," one can use a pointed cautery tool to create multiple incisions around the knuckles and fingertips, ensuring thorough treatment.) [Answer 27:
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain rises after several days to the thighs or muscles, then cauterize all around each of them. (Note: The text suggests that when treating joint pain or arthritis that has spread to other areas such as the thighs or muscles, one can use a circular cautery tool to create multiple incisions around the entire circumference of each affected area, ensuring thorough treatment.) [Answer 29:
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And if you do not evacuate the patient of good habits and reception of medicines, for if good habits are practiced and excess phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, God willing, it will heal. (Note: The text suggests that successful treatment of joint pain or arthritis using cauterization requires both good habits and appropriate medication.)
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45 (This is a heading indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the text.)
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	"On the Cautery Treatment for Fractures." (Note: This chapter discusses the use of cautery as a treatment for fractures, which are breaks or cracks in bones or cartilage.)
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the groin and intestines protrude before the hernia at the genitalia, and this begins to happen, it is necessary that you order the patient to rest in their bed on the day of the injury and use mild laxatives so that the wound in their abdomen can heal. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture in the groin area with protruding intestines, one should encourage the patient to rest and take mild laxatives to promote healing.) [Answer 34:
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and order them to keep their legs closed until the fracture is set or the hernia or intestines have retracted. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture in the groin area with protruding intestines, one should apply gentle pressure to the affected area and encourage the patient to keep their legs closed until the injury has healed.) [Answer 38:
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And then return the affected area to its place, and mark it with a sign or symbol using a probe, tracing the outline of the fracture along the bone in the shape of a circle at the upper parts of the body. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture, one should use a probe to trace the outline of the injury on the affected bone, creating a circular mark that can be used as a reference point during the healing process.)
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery tool, which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red hot and emits sparks. (Note: The text suggests that when using a cautery tool to treat a fracture, one should ensure that it is red hot and emitting sparks before applying it to the affected area.)
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestines or hernia to their cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent them from protruding again. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture with protruding intestines or hernias, one should first return these organs to their proper location before using a cautery tool to treat the injury.) [Answer 42:
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath them, while another servant is holding their legs still, and another is supporting their chest, all of whom should hold their hands steady. (Note: The text suggests that when treating a fracture in the groin area with protruding intestines, one should ensure that the patient is properly positioned and supported during the treatment process.)
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery tool over the mark with your hand holding it steady, and move it along the length of the bone in the middle of the wound; repeat this process if you have not successfully reached the bone on the first attempt. (Note: The text suggests that when using a cautery tool to treat a fracture, one should carefully trace the outline of the injury along the affected bone, repeating the process if necessary to ensure thorough treatment.)
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn the intestine and cause the patient to come to harm or suffer grave damage.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, but be careful in your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	It is appropriate that the cautery for children be fine and according to their size and age.[modelact:se: I will continue with the next sentence, as requested. Here is the translation:
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	Then take care of the area of the cautery for three days with a poultice until the scar of the fire has formed.[modelact:se: Here is the translation for the next sentence:
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of those wounds with other ointments until they are healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And let the patient lie on their back for forty days, so that the place and wound can be sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	It is appropriate to provide nourishment for the patient according to the length of time it takes for their treatment, which will help heal their stomach and prevent the intestines from coming out during recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then, when they wish to get up after forty days, administer light and appropriate food for them and keep this up for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And let them reduce their work and consumption of food and drink, as well as loud voices, for when they follow this regimen completely, they will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say that the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the stomach is as follows, and this should be done without interruption: cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what comes out of the intestines be like one third of it. Then take care of the area as we have said, and do not apply a dressing that is too tight.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I have already mentioned that the first treatment for a rupture is to cauterize it with a triangular cautery of this shape, as indicated by the diagram.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is recommended to draw a line along the length of the side of the rupture that is higher up, and another line above it; then place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cauterization is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Here is a possible translation for "De cauterizacio de torcio" (On the Cauterization of Twisting):
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	Here is a possible translation for "Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt" (When pain arises in some members due to striking or injury and this pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medications, then it is appropriate to cauterize with a pointed cautery):
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	Here is a possible translation for "E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu" (And let the cautery be applied to each member according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, location of twisting, and pain):
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Here is a possible translation for "Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat" (Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterization, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery; for these types of pains are usually punctured from one member to the next nearest member. Therefore, it is necessary to continue with the cautery until the patient is healed):
Capitol .xlvii.	Here is a possible translation for "Capitol .xlvii." (Chapter 47):
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Here is a possible translation for "De cauterizacio de lepra" (On the Cauterization of Leprosy):
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Here is a possible translation for "Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia" (Lepers are sometimes helped greatly by cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and black bile):
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Here is a possible translation for "E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz" (And so when you wish to cauterize that [leprosy], consider whether it is widespread or not, and treat it as we have said in the division. Do not spare or withhold treatment, but fear that corruption may spread throughout the patient's body and complexion. Therefore, cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another lower down above the eyebrows, two over the temples, and one behind, on the neck or shoulder):
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	Here is a possible translation for "E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit" (And finally, place your hand with the cautery a little on it until a slight impression is made on the bone, and let the scabs be removed from it, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be relieved from it; and cauterize over the spleen as needed):
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	Here is a possible translation for "E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas" (And if leprosy has spread over the patient and is apparent, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have mentioned on the head; and a cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on the two fingers, two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, one on the rib, and two on the hips, two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the elbows and one on each elbow, and two on the shoulders, and two on the sinews of their feet; and cauterize it over all the joints of the fingers and toes, and on each heel of their feet, and on the knuckles of their hands):
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	Here is a possible translation for "E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels" (And be careful not to burn the nerves which are above the heel):
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Here is a possible translation for "E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am altre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge" (And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the chin and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver):
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	Here is a possible translation for "E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt" (And know that the more cauteries you apply, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do with their sores, because their body is already stupefied):
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	Here is a possible translation for "E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz" (And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints, as is indicated by the types of instruments):
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Here is a possible translation for "E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat" (And then care for the cautery with flour of iris mixed with honey and the other treatment until it is healed):
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices but has not healed, then you should cauterize the affected limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter slightly into the tip of the spine.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then heal that area with a soothing ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes numbness is cauterized in certain areas of the hands, feet, and spine; as well as around eye sockets where there are growths on the nerves that cause numbness in a member, and the numbness diminishes as a result.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not assume this based on my words alone, but rather consult someone knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the course of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On the Cauterization of Scars, also known as Morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When a scar is old and resistant to various medical ointments, then you should cauterize it with a preon (sharp-pointed) cautery slightly, according to the size of the scar, until its whiteness and original color have faded away and its color has changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	Then heal it with a mixture of barley flour and lentil powder moistened with roasted oil and crushed leaves of arnica, mixed with dove's blood or pigeon's blood (equal parts), all mixed together; then apply a cloth dipped in this mixture to the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On the Cauterization of Cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along the circumference of it as closely as possible.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last (circular) cautery in the middle of the area; but I have not seen this done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have personally seen this happen on several occasions.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more appropriate to cauterize around its edges with a circular cautery, as we have said, or with many small cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On the Cauterization of Abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is slow to mature, it may be due to excess pus or the patient's condition, such as old age or weakness, or simply due to the length of time; and you want to speed up the maturation process of the abscess, then cauterize its edges with many small puncturing cauteries. Then leave it alone so that it can mature quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to perforate the abscess with a cautery, then here is its shape and form: place the cautery in the middle of the abscess until it penetrates the bone.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in that location where there is pus, in order to relieve the body of the arm; and then heal it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On the Cauterization of Corrosive Substances.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosive substance is a mobile corruption in the member, which corrodes it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see a corrosive substance in a location where it is appropriate to use cautery with fire, then you should use many small and large cauteries, as needed, at the site of the corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then you should cauterize all around until you eradicate all of the corruption, leaving no cause or source of it remaining.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then you should leave it alone for three days and apply oil mixed with crushed herbs to the cauterized areas until all of the scabs have been eradicated and all of the corruption has been eliminated.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then heal it with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days healthy flesh begins to grow in the area where there is no corruption, then that is good; but if not, then you should repeat the cauterization on the areas that are still corrupt.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	A corrosive substance can be treated with sharp medicine in some cases, as this is a substitute for cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, cauterization with fire provides quicker relief.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	I have already mentioned the treatment of corrosive substances with sharp medicine in the previous section; therefore, take that when you see fit to use it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On the Cauterization of Nails and Similar Things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many patients suffer from a disease at the lower part of the leg called "clau," which is a serious ingressive condition that affects the foot; and cauterization in such cases is done in two ways: either with fire or with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	The cautery with fire is that you heat the concave cautery, which should be shaped like aulture's beak, made of iron and of a size that matches the entire width of the "clau" or swelling, with thin edges.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then place that fire over the "clau" and move your hand with the cautery along the circumference of the "clau," rotating it until the cautery reaches the depth of the swelling.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	Leave it in place for three days, or until it starts to discharge pus.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made of crushed mallow leaves with salt, and leave it on for one night, as this will help draw out the root cause of the problem.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the area with animal-derived fat or ointment to promote healing.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	If the condition persists and many patients suffer from similar symptoms on various parts of their body, especially on the hands and feet, then it is recommended to use a water-based cautery in these cases. To do this, take an iron or copper canula, or one shaped like aulture's beak, and heat it until it becomes red hot. Place it over the swelling and pour a small amount of hot water into the canula so that it reaches the root cause of the problem. Keep your hand steady and rotate the canula with gentle pressure, ensuring that its edges penetrate deep into the swelling and allow the hot water to reach the root of the problem. The patient should endure this treatment for an hour, after which you may remove the canula as the "clau" will have been drawn out.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And repeat this process for all of the affected areas until they are completely healed.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then treat any remaining pus from the now-removed swellings with ointments derived from animal fats or other substances that promote skin growth and regeneration.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Chapter III: On the use of cautery for treating tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When a tremor is caused by cold in the nerves or fever due to similar causes, it is necessary to use four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra. Additionally, use an olive-shaped cautery on the soles of the feet and another on the stomach. [
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And as the tremor subsides, it will hasten the healing process for the illness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Chapter LVI: On Cauterization of White Spots on the Body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When white spots appear on the body and develop into pustules or fissures filled with thick, corrupt matter, it is advisable to begin treatment by cauterizing the tip of the fistula with a slender, pointed cautery made from myrtle wood, with its tip extended using fire; or with a long surgical needle; or with a lenticular cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is appropriate to cauterize around the beginning of the expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be real, but rather a superficial excess that can be removed by cauterization, allowing for healing from them.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is also necessary to perform evacuation with bloodletting (phlebotomy).
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Chapter LVI: On Cauterization for Flexion of Blood Vessels Through Incision of Arteries
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Many patients suffer from flexion of arteries which is caused by incisions in the affected area, either due to wounds on the outside or incisions made during surgery for abscesses or cauterization of a limb, and it can be difficult to remedy this condition.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when such a condition occurs, you should immediately place your hand over the orifice of the artery and press firmly on it with your fingers until the spasm in the blood vessels below the incision subsides and no more blood flows out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then place the olive-shaped cauteries on the fire and heat them for a short time with a large flame, until they are very hot. Then blow on them gently to make sure they are glowing red all over.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take one of the heated cauteries, either small or large, depending on the location and severity of the wound where the artery has been ruptured, and quickly apply it to the vein that you have identified as being dilated due to the bleeding, with the aim of cauterizing and constricting the blood vessel to stop the flow of blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood continues to flow out of the orifice of the artery after you remove the cautery and apply pressure, then take another cautery that has been prepared in the fire and continue to apply it until the bleeding stops.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves in the area, as this could lead to further complications for the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding by simply constricting the artery, especially when the artery is large. Instead, there are four methods that can be used: cauterization as previously described, extraction if not already extracted, as extracting the ends of the artery will cause them to burn and constrict the blood flow; ligation with either bile or a strong ligature; or application of medicines that have the power to restrict the blood flow, while also applying pressure with a cushion and proper bandaging.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But he who administers a gentle restriction to the limb and stricture with cloths or by means of heating causes or similar ones, should not hasten but rather wait.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this is done to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then place a gentle pressure on the finger indicated over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and pay attention to the great constriction inside so that the blood remains an obstacle to the superior division of the wound, and above the artery it should not be bulging; and above the artery it should be sprinkled with very cold water until the blood coagulates and thickens; and further consider what is necessary for cauterization or medicine.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Here begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions, perforations, cupping glasses, bloodletting, wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all diseases for which cautery with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and their occasions and causes, and the instruments necessary for them with the forms of cauteries; and I have organized the chapters from the superiority of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner so that it may be easier for those seeking to understand, and on top of what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin, it is appropriate for you, dear reader, to understand that in this chapter, what was mentioned in the first chapter about cauterization will be expanded upon for emphasis.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And therefore, great caution is required, for in the operation described in this chapter, there are many instances of evacuation that occur with blood, which is life itself; and this can be caused by venesection or incision on the abscess or appearance of an abscess, purging of a wound, extraction of an arrow or incision of a stone and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and often, the death of many people.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I warn you not to fall into that in which there is hesitation, for sometimes you must deal with diseases as a man deals with many other things.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them will flee from you with their disease and it may be easy for you to save them, but sometimes due to the severity of their illness or its long duration, or because the illness is one that implies death, they will fear you.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And there are some who give you their wealth and say that with this they expect health from you, but their illness is deadly.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so it is not appropriate for you to consent to those who come to you in this manner; your caution should be greater than your greed and do not presume any cause without a certain science that verifies it and leads to praiseworthy succession.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use prognosis and indication of recovery in the treatment of all your patients, for it is a help to you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, my sons, may God breathe his understanding into you and not deprive you of his guidance and protection, for it is in his hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have organized this chapter into sections according to what was said in the chapter on cautery, from the cure of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easier for you to understand and meet your needs.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure for water that is contained in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness often occurs in infants after childbirth and when the nurse first lifts the baby's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to a hidden cause which is not known. [**Note**: This text is likely referring to hydrocephalus, a condition in infants where there is an abnormal accumulation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the brain. This can lead to enlargement of the head and other neurological symptoms. The cause of this condition is not always known.]
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in infants, and for all those that I have seen, their condition is close to death, and therefore, I have left them alone (without treatment). [**Note**: This approach would be considered unacceptable by modern medical standards. Hydrocephalus can lead to severe neurological damage if not treated promptly and effectively.]
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen that an infant whose head was filled with water, and its head was always swollen to the point where it could not bend over due to the size of its head, and as the fluid increased further, it reached the point of death. [**Note**: This is still consistent with a severe case of hydrocephalus.]
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this fluid is either collected between the skin and the bone, or it is collected below the bone on the scalp.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in this case (where the fluid is between the skin and the bone) and the abscess is small, it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure that is two fingers wide, and its length should be enough so that the fluid can run out, and this is the shape of the spatula (tool used to make the incision):
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the fluid is more increased and the abscess is larger, then in this case there should be two incisions made in this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the fluid is below the bone, the sign of this is that you see the seams (sutures) of the head open in all directions and the water comes out when you press it with your hand on the inside parts and it's not hidden.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary for you to make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And make sure to extract all the fluid through the incision; then close the incisions with cloths and feathers, and apply on top a mixture of vinegar and oil within the fifth day, then loosen the ligaments and care for the wound with bandages and ointments, and wrap the head evenly. And feed the patient with dry food that has little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of making the incision, which you consider when you see the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is larger in the occipital area, or in the front part, or on the right, or on the left; and so pay attention to where the abscess appears and the accumulation of water, and make the incision there in a way that is best for you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not incise the artery and avoid causing a flow of blood, for the patient may die from this bleeding while also evacuating the water.
Capitol .ii.	Second chapter.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On incisions of the arteries that are near the ears, called "hilasseysse."
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When someone has catarrh or wounds in the ears or chest, and it is old (chronic), and you do not see any improvement with medication, then the last treatment for this is incision of those two arteries (carotid arteries).
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And so when you want to make an incision in those (carotid) arteries, it is necessary that the patient raise their head, and then wipe the area with a rough cloth to locate the arteries, and tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse of the vein can be felt; and the locations of each of them are near the ears, but they are hidden except in some people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And place a sign on the artery with a bandage, and then make an incision in each of them with the spatula of each side sharp, making the incision penetrate to the bone, and let it be for the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at its base, cutting upwards to the sides.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be two digits wide, because when any vein is cut, blood will come out with a pulsatile flow that jumps out frequently.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear in the incision, then it is necessary to measure three digits from the ear and place a sign with a bandage there, and then cut into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what is necessary to drain from the blood is a quantity of wine, one cup. And you should drain a little more or less, and all of that depends on the amount that appears based on the strength of the patient and the swelling of the artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And you should also consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of the scalp, then incise it to prevent abscess from forming.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with feathers and bandages of linen, and care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capital III
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On the extraction of veins that are located in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When someone suffers from old-age migraines or severe headaches, due to moisture in the temples and a certain quality in those veins, or from hardened old age that resembles them, and medical treatment methods do not help, then we resort to this procedure for these conditions: extracting veins in the temples or cauterizing those areas, as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method for performing the operation and extracting those veins is as follows: the patient shaves the hairs in their temples; then they should look for the visible vein in the temple, which can be found by its pulsation, unless it is hidden due to excessive cold.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if the vein is hidden, then have the patient's head stretched with a cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or apply warm water until the vein becomes visible.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then take the spatula of this shape: (presumably followed by a description of the shape and size of the spatula)
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you should gently scrape the skull with the spatula until you reach the vein; and make an incision in it, extracting it from the upper parts until you remove it from the skull, exposing the underlying tissue.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the vein is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of your finger, and make an incision in it to the extent that the length and contraction of its ends allow, without causing blood flow. This must be done carefully, as failure to make an adequate incision will not allow sufficient blood flow.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	Then evacuate one ounce of blood. (Note: "Evacuate" here means to let out or remove the blood.) Within three. This could mean within three minutes, hours, or days, depending on the context. It is unclear from this sentence alone how much time is allowed for the evacuation of one ounce of blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the vein is large, then it should be tied in two places with strong thread or cord, using double knots, to prevent infection and ensure proper blood flow until the wound heals.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then make an incision in the excess tissue that lies between two ligaments, doing so either immediately or at another time. (Note: "Superfluitat" likely refers to unnecessary or redundant tissue.)
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if desired, cauterize the incision using a knife-like cautery tool until the ends of the wound are completely closed, which will serve as an alternative to suturing the wound. (Note: "Cauteri cutellar" likely refers to a small knife used for cauterization.)
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better if the patient has a fever or is of a hot constitution, as cauterization helps to reduce excess moisture and therefore is more beneficial. (Note: "Juvament" means aid or assistance.)
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And the extraction of veins should be followed by packing the wound with suitable dressing and applying dry medications that promote healing and the growth of new skin, as well as using lotions or other remedies to help the wound heal. (Note: "Polvils decentament fayt" likely refers to clean bandages or dressings made from soft materials.)
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if unintentionally, during the procedure, blood flows from the vein, then you should take steps to stop the bleeding, such as using cauterization or packing the wound with appropriate dressing material, while applying pressure to restrict the flow of blood. (Note: "Omplas le loc de coto" means to fill the wound with a suitable material for stopping bleeding.)
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if none of the above methods are available to you, then place your finger on the wound until the bleeding stops, and apply hot water or a hot compress to the area to help reduce swelling, while also applying pressure as needed to restrict the flow of blood. (Note: "Aygua de vehement fregiditat" means very hot water.)
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	A lighter method of vein extraction is to use a two-bladed cautery tool to cut and cauterize the vein simultaneously. First, mark two points on either side of the vein with a probe, then apply each blade of the cautery tool in turn until they reach the bone and cut through the vein in two places, thereby elongating it without completely severing its ends. This method is less invasive than full extraction, as the ends are not completely detached from one another, allowing for faster healing. (Note: "Depausa quascus, mot ignitz" means to apply each blade of the cautery tool in turn, a little at a time, while heating them up.)
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery tool: (presumably followed by a description of the tool's size, shape, and materials)
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And let the blades of the two-pronged cautery be sharp. (Note: "Esemps" means equal or evenly matched.)
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if the blades are not as sharp as two knives, it is better for them to be less sharp and closer together, so that they do not cut through the skin too quickly or deeply, causing unnecessary damage. (Note: "Propera a quascuna freg" means close to each other.)
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	And so, if the blades are thicker, then maintain a lower heat in the fire and cut through the skin lightly. (Note: "Alcuna grossitut" means some thickness or bulk.)
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this method is better in all ways and less invasive.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between the two blades be the width of a finger. (Note: "Grossesa" means thickness or breadth.)
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and sour teary eyes in humans. (Note: "Huels" is likely a typo and should be "homes," meaning humans or people.)
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the eyes are watery and sour, and this is caused by veins on the forehead above the eyebrows, and no other remedies of medicine are effective, and sometimes the patient's face becomes red and they feel a tingling sensation as if ants were crawling on their forehead, and their eyelids become swollen and hot to the touch, with hair standing on end, and their eyelashes are singed from the acidity of the tears, then use the ancient remedy for treating this condition by performing the following operation: cure it with pressure. (Note: "Aquela curacio am spassa" means to treat it by applying pressure.)
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And order the patient to shave the hairs on their forehead and then make three equal incisions on the forehead using a sharp tool such as a scalpel or lancet, taking care to space them evenly according to the length of the forehead. (Note: "Engualment distans" means equally spaced.) [{\
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of these incisions spans two fingers, then make the first incision at a distance equal to half the width of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second should be slightly shorter than the length of the eyelids and located near the lacrimal glands, and the third should be on the opposite side. (Note: "Lacertz" means eyelids.)
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And be careful not to cut the veins in the temples and keep your hands away from the continuation of both jawbones. (Note: "Latz" means sides or temples, while "mandibulas" means jaws.)
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space between each incision is three fingers wide, adjust accordingly. (Note: "Ajustatz" means adjust or adapt.)
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you have a sponge or dry cloths ready, use them to absorb the blood. (Note: "Apparelhada" means prepared, and "seccatz" means dry.)
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, and make an incision in the shape of this spatula. (Note: "Inscisio" means incision, and "lu" refers to the object being cut.)
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which extends from the temple area to the second incision. (Note: "Partida" means section, and "templas" refers to the temples on either side of the forehead.)
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise all the skin that is between two incisions with the scalpel that is on top of the bone, and then do the same for the middle incision between the first and second incisions. (Note: "Exxcorja" means excise or remove, "ciphac" refers to a sharp tool such as a knife or scalpel, "os" means bone.)
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then insert the spatula again into the first incision and use another tool called a cutellar, which has one sharp end and one blunt end. (Note: "Cutellar" is a type of knife or scalpel with a sharp edge on one side and a blunt edge on the other.)
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And then place the sharp edge of the instrument on the skin attached to the bone, and the other end of it against the bone, and insert it so that it reaches the middle incision, and cut through all the veins and arteries that descend from the head to the feet using this instrument. (Note: "Vaysels" means vessels or ducts.)
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But the incision should continue to the point where the bone appears, and then do the same for the middle incision between the two other incisions. (Note: "Appar" means appear or emerge.)
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And once enough blood has been released to reduce pressure, squeeze the cloths soaked with clotted blood. (Note: "Exprem" means squeeze or press.)
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And apply a poultice of aged cow dung to each crack, and put on top of it powders mixed with wine and oil and wine vinegar, and see that they do not cause abscess formation by cauterization.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day, loosen the ligament and administer a large infusion of hot water or decoction, and treat this with basilicon salve with rose oil and other things to ensure that the sores are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of headaches with catharsis and the downward-descending humors from within the head parts.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there is an acute and continuous catharsis in some veins, and the patient's humors are exhausted and become small, their appearance becomes weak, their eyelids are ulcerated, and their hair falls out, and they have a severe headache with sharp lancinating pain and consequent prostration, then you should understand by these signs that the matter and catharsis do not come from any other veins but those that originate from inside the head parts.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for this is as follows: you should instruct the patient to scratch their forehead, and then make an incision on it in a central location, not too deep but enough to reach the bone; continue from the left temple to the right temple, making sure that the incision goes through the bone; keep your hand away from the temporal muscles which are damaged due to excessive chewing.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill the space between the two lips of the incision with aged cow dung or clean rags.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply poultices mixed with wine and oil on top of it to prevent abscess formation by cauterization.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you see that the abscess has diminished, then you should scrape the bone until flesh starts to grow there, and then treat this with a drying regimen that promotes tissue growth, for example by mixing equal parts of wheat flour and colophony and making a plaster out of it, which is then applied to the wounds to encourage natural skin growth.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the treatment of discharge in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of discharge in the ears is one of four types: it can be mineral-like or similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or come from plants like cress or broad beans, or be liquid-like, such as water, vinegar, and their equivalents, or caused by some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	Therefore, when stone or another similar cause that is not suitable or compatible with the ear causes discharge in the ear, then expose the ear to sunlight and if you see the stone, distill some solution of oil of violet or cedar on it, and perform an extraction by inducing sneezing while closing the nostrils, and do this carefully.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then apply some cloth or wool pads to the outer edge of the ear, and pull up the ear lobe to expose the parts above it, because many times such discharge is caused by foreign objects.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not expelled, then perform an extraction using the delicate tool called gesti epicicarios, which has the following form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	If it is removed by the tool, then that's good; otherwise, perform an extraction using a delicate probe with two curves or bends.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	Therefore, if it is not removed by that, then make a cannula from silver and insert the tip of the cannula into the opening of the ear canal, and seal the area around the cannula with wax or soft oil to prevent any other substance from entering but the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract it with your breath with strong suction, because many times this is effective as we have mentioned.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not removed in this way, then take a small piece of alum or an old tool with which you can catch birds with one hand, and place it at the end of the probe, and then wrap it tightly around the probe.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then insert it gently into the ear canal and dry out the moisture in the ear.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	Therefore, if it is not removed by any of the methods mentioned above, then consider cutting it out before it causes abscess formation or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The method of cutting it out is as follows: first, anesthetize the patient by cutting a vein in the arm and extracting blood according to the strength of their vitality. Then place your hand over the patient's head and turn the ear upwards. Finally, make a small incision at the root of the ear, where it is tightly attached to the head, with great precision and care.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be crescent-shaped and deep enough to reach the stone. Once you see the stone has turned black or blue, remove it with appropriate instruments. Then close the wound quickly and treat it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of discharge in the ear is one of the fats that are produced and swollen, then perform the treatment and extraction of it. But if you don't follow my instructions, then take fresh pus from another person and apply it to the affected area as follows:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And apply the abscess of that fat which has fallen into the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And don't do that when you think the object is already wet from the moisture of the ear. Instead, place it on many cloth pads and extract it with delicate probes or incisions as mentioned before, because this makes the extraction easier.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But if water has entered the ear, then the patient should first use sneezing with caution, and then fill their ear with some old cloth or cotton, and then place another cloth over the ear where the water is, and if it comes out, that's good. If not, then take many new pebbles and lemons according to the size of the finger, and heat them in the fire a little, and the patient should insert one of those pebbles into the opening of their ear and jump on one foot on that side, and strike the pebble inside the ear with another pebble.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	And do not stop doing that with the stone until all the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water has been removed, you will notice that it has become clear like paper or linen. And place one end of it in the ear and extend the other end with fire until it is burned most of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another linen and do that many times until all the water is expelled, and clean it with a cannula as mentioned above for the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But for the removal of an animal that has entered the ear and is small and similar to a louse, cure it as we have said in the division. But if it is large and causes pain in the sensation, then perform the extraction with probes and forceps, and the cause of it is lighter than all other causes that can enter the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But for the removal of a worm born in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and not confuse your treatment, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore, if you see any sign of the worms there, then extract it with forceps or delicate probes. But if you don't see any signs, then take a cannula that is narrow at the tip and wide at the base, which has this form:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the narrow end of the cannula into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with it by strong suction, and do this many times until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if he does not obey your assistance, then fill and close the opening of the canula with wax as we have said; then administer drippings which have been proven by the ancients in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on drippings.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your infusion be with which you pour the medical oils into the ear using this instrument of which this is its shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or iron, straight, with a small hole at the end and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so that it is pushed in to where it is necessary in the cavity of the canula.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it appropriately at the end, then pour oil into the cavity of the infusion, or the juice of any herb, or whatever you choose from these medicines in the canula - which is in the ear -, then insert the rod wrapped with a bandage and press gently with your hand until the oil is expelled in the cavity of the infusion and the patient feels it inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And let what is inserted in the ear be lightly burned with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be careful that the cause which you will infuse in the ear is not too cold, for ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	On the cure of obstruction in ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Some children's ears become blocked while still in their mothers' wombs and do not pierce through, and this also happens to some adults due to blockage caused by earwax or foreign matter; sometimes the blockage is located in the inner portion of the ear canal that is not visible, and other times it occurs in the outer part.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And those that occur in the inner portion of the ear canal, which are not visible, are more difficult to cure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in the case where you can see the blockage, it is necessary to turn the patient's ear towards the sun and look at it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see an obvious blockage, open it using this thin spatula of the following shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	The tip of it should be narrow, with one side being sharp and the other not, and the spatula itself should be two finger-widths wide to avoid harming the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so if the blockage is due to excess earwax or flesh inside the ear canal, then use fine probes and carefully cut it away until all of the excess flesh has been removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the blockage is located in the inner part of the ear canal, then take a thin rod and lightly heat it over fire, then gently insert it into the ear canal.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so if you feel the blockage with what the patient experiences difficulty hearing, gently press on it to relieve the pressure, but be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cloth on the ear according to the size of the opening that you have wrapped with Egyptian wax; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the injury, or take some and soak it in warm water and powder it over the area, using it three times a day. If the ear has become inflamed, then you must lance the abscess and replace the bandage with another that has been wrapped in wax made from roses oil until the swelling subsides; then continue to care for the wound until it heals.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, then submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment that stops blood flow, which is called cauterization in the treatise on drippings.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	On the treatment of blepharitis, which affects the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Blepharitis can occur in the eyelids of both eyes and can sometimes be caused by excess moisture or dryness.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, it is necessary to have tweezers or probes and use a spatula to separate the eyelashes from their roots, then place them over the affected area three times a day.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain and bleeding occur, then cauterize the area with a fine lancet.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best cauterization is achieved by making incisions and cutting off the roots of the lashes, which are burned away with fire and cannot grow back.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Treatment for styes that occur on the eyelids.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times styes occur on the eyelids due to various causes that resemble an abscess in their strength and hardness, and for this reason they are called "grandissias".
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid, both above and below.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation consists of considering whether the stye is protruding from the eyelid and affects all parts of it, and if its cause is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision in it along its length and then carefully scrape away the edges until it dries up; then use tweezers to lift it and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared to make an incision in it, then carefully cut into the eyelid bit by bit until it is deep enough; this will not cause any harm.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the wound is large, then stitch it up with sutures, and care for it until it heals.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, then there will be no harm in leaving it alone, as the wound's natural healing process and tissue regeneration will take care of it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	If the stye is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid and its surface, then carefully evert the eyelid and lift the stye with tweezers (of your choosing), and press it from all sides. If the incision on the eyelid is long, this will not cause any harm.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And then wash your hands with salt water, and care for the wound until it heals over time.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Treatment for an external hordeolum (stye) on the upper eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	An external hordeolum is a swelling that forms in the outer layer of the upper eyelid, often affecting children and causing their eyes to become inflamed, red, and sensitive to light; it can also interfere with their vision and make it difficult for them to open their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And for this reason, you often see them touching their faces and sleeping with their eyes closed, and if the eyebrows are wet, there is already inflammation present, and a clear sign of impending infection is evident in the eye; and when you touch the area with your fingers, you can feel it swollen.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	One method of treatment is for the patient to place their head on your lap and cover themselves with a cloth or towel; then you should create a circle around the affected area, taking care to include all redness and swelling, and place it over the stye, pressing gently with your fingertips until pus forms in the center of the circle. Then, use a spatula to make an incision in the center of the pus, being careful not to cut too deep, similar to a procedure used in bloodletting.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Surely in the prior proceeding you should split the shinbone all the way through until you reach the knee, since in most severe cases the kneecap can be reached through a fissure following the shape of a white grain.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract those bandages which you have wrapped between the thighs and rotate them with your right and left hands until they are fully spread out.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to touch the fissure with your instrument, lest it reaches the bone and damages it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see your artery at the beginning of the fissure, then insert a slender instrument into it until it reaches the artery; and extract it in the same manner as we have described; and moisten bandages with wine and vinegar and place them over the area, holding them in place with compresses.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And ensure that three pieces of salt are placed in the cavity of the fissure, to absorb any remaining moisture.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if a boil appears in the area, then treat it with emollient plasters until it heals.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	On methods of touching the bone.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When hairs in the eyelids become ingrown due to natural growth and aging, then this causes various ailments of the eye such as constant tears, swelling of the eyelid, and thickening of the skin, leading to a condition known as tactinir of the eye, which can be cured in four ways: through cauterization with fire; through acute medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; by surgical incision and stitching; or through the use of canes as I will describe.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And so you must position the patient's head towards your thigh; then turn the eyelid of the affected eye towards your left hand, and if it turns easily, that is good. But if not, insert a needle into the one closest to the lower part of the eyelid, and apply vitriol on top of it, and direct the needle towards the margin of the eyelid where the lashes are, close to the lashes, and pull the vitriol upwards with the eyelid, turning it in that direction.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And make an incision in the inner part of the eyelid, below the ingrown lashes, using a sharp scalpel from the lacrimal gland to the lacrimal duct; then extract the vitriol and place small pieces of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and cover it with a tent made of thin linen, shaped like a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But it is important that the shape of the incision matches the degree of swelling of the eyelid, as this varies from person to person, since some people require a larger incision in the upper eyelid depending on the degree of swelling.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And make an incision with the scalpel along the two lines you have marked, starting from the lacrimal gland to the lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is close to the natural lashes, like that of a king's beard.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And insert a probe into one of the two corners of the shinbone, and scrape it thoroughly, then apply stitches to bring together the two lips with fine wool or vitriol, and wipe away any blood, and if you wish, attach any excess vitriol to the eyebrows using some adhesive.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And leave the stitches in place for three or four days, and then take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches and treat it with dry and constricting agents, because the eyelid will be swollen due to the sealing of the wound and the accumulation of fluid; but stitching is better, as I have said before.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But if the patient complains of discomfort, then it is good to operate and not to be afraid.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another method of operating on the eyelid, which involves making marks in the shape of a myrtle leaf and then raising the eyelid using three separate and connected probes.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, then hold the probes and ensure they are clean. If not, take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the markings; place one end near the lacrimal gland and the other near the lacrimal duct, and adjust the thread equally between your fingers, then lift the entire shinbone as we have described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if a boil forms near your incision or fissure, then treat it with cerate and similar substances, and with ointments.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes the eyelashes turn inward, then it is necessary to use the method of incision as we have described; but stitching is more artificial in each case.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Treating tactinir with canes is done in this way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it involves turning the eyelid and cutting along the markings on the inner side, as I have described; then take two thin canes or rods that are as long as the eyelid and narrower than the width of a scalpel.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each section, where the stitches are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then attach each cane to the excess skin of the eyelid with great care and constrict them tightly, leaving it in place for several days. The shinbone will die due to the constriction and become necrotic, shrinking and drying out until it falls off on its own.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it takes too long, then break the canes with tweezers and treat the wound until it heals.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And once it has healed, the eyelid will be lifted and the lashes will not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the method for using two canes that you will follow in this way:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	and should be of equal length and width.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	On lifting ingrown eyelashes using a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the eyelashes are not natural and hard, rough, and ingrown, then the procedure involves taking a fine needle and dipping it in soft, subtle wax or lion fat, and then carefully adjusting the ends of the needle so that they are slightly curved.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the curved needle be about the size of one palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then take another fine needle and bend it slightly in the same way if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And have the patient place their head in your lap and position them so that they are facing the sun, so that your work is visible, as it is a delicate and precise procedure.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And insert the needle into the root of the ingrown hair with some force and quickly push it through the eyelid until you pull out the natural hair above it.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull out the ingrown hair and insert it in a piece of linen or cloth, and there should be one, two, or three hairs at most.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with the linen and ingrown hair away from the eyelid, making sure that it is extracted together with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the linen is pulled out without extracting the hair, then pull it away from the lower parts using the needle that you have prepared until the ingrown hair is extracted through the upper hole.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And observe the state of the eye, as you will then extract both the linen and the needle, and close the wound with clamps or stitches, leaving them in place for two or three days until the ingrown hair adheres to its original position and grows back healthy skin.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the hair is sparse, then attach artificial hair that matches the natural hair, and lift it up so that it can be lengthened over some distance, and then you lift it up.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	On the treatment of a swelling that appears on the upper eyelid.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When a swelling appears on the eye and is accompanied by a contraction of the eyelid that pulls to the right or left due to poor healing of a wound, incision, or cauterization, it is called "leporina," and such a swelling can be either natural or accidental, resulting from healing of wounds, incisions, or cauterizations, or similar causes.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of the operation for this condition involves cutting open the swelling and separating its lips, placing a piece of linen cloth in the space between them, and then binding the lips together until they heal.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And it is not necessary to use drying or constricting treatments for the causes of this condition because doing so will only make the swelling worse than it ever was before.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Instead, use remedies that soften the swelling, such as fenugreek, and cook it in water with elder flowers and seeds, or make a poultice of figs, which has been liquefied with one of the oils, and soak the cloth in this mixture and use it to treat the swelling.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The goal of your treatment is to penetrate thoroughly, without causing further scarring, in the same manner as was done at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation that we have described is nothing more than a correction of swelling that does not return the form of the area to its previous state.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter fourteen.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	On the treatment of a swelling that appears below the eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This swelling that appears below the eyelid is truly called "alxacrati," and it can be either natural or accidental in origin.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	But an accidental swelling can arise from wounds, cuts, cauterization, or similar causes.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	The method of operating on this condition is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the swelling.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then stretch the skin at the edges with the needle and stitch it up with the needle, and use a wide-bladed knife to make an incision.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the appearance of the eyelid is restored to its proper form, that is good; but if not, take a scalpel and place it in the slit, and use it to shape the eyelid, and make two cuts in the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And the ends of these two incisions should be at the two corners of the slit that you have made, and they should converge so that the resulting shape is formed by the meeting of these angles.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this shape is the Greek letter lambda (Λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the excess flesh from the lower eyelid so that it is cut to the same length as the upper eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then bring the separated parts together and stitch them up with wool thread, and treat the area with the softening remedies and cauterization until it heals.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the swelling arises from a cut, stitch, or cauterization, then it is necessary to make an incision in a flat line along the hairs of the eyelid as previously described.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with a cauterization between two lips as we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary, the treatment of alxacrati, whether it is above or below the eyelid, involves an operation that follows the preparation of the alxacrati, which has a diverse shape similar to lumps.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And wise artisans always prepare various methods for making the form return to its natural state or as close to it as possible, depending on what is suitable for the patient in terms of the operation and the instruments used.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter fifteen.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in some people such that the eyelid is stuck above to the white of the eye and movement is restricted, making it difficult for them to perform their natural functions, then it is necessary to insert a scalpel under the lower eyelid and lift it up or stretch it with forceps.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you should make an incision in the adhesion with a fine, blunt knife that is not too sharp so as not to disturb the patient during the operation and keep the knife from damaging the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be made so as to easily remove the adhesion, returning the eyelid to its natural form and healing the entire area of adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you should put salt water in the eye, which you can use to rinse it; or distill juniper, dissolved in water, into it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then, use a cautery to separate the eyelid from the eye, and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and for three days use remedies that promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter sixteen.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	On incision of a nail and growths of flesh on the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that there are two types of nails: those that are nervous and resemble hard, thin bone; and those that are not nervous, which are similar to congealed white moisture, and when they are cut or forced to be held with forceps, they are easily cut and the forceps do not penetrate.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types of nails begin at the inner corner of the eye, where they gradually cover the sight and restrict its light and movement.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	The method of working in the incision of the patient is for the patient to place their head on your knee, and you open the folds of them, lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect a fold of skin with an ounce of moderate traction and extend it to the parts above.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert it into that fold of skin, with a horsehair or ox or cow hair, or similar, or with strong bile, or gradually double the tip of the needle and place it in the middle of the fold of skin, and penetrate it with the needle, and bind the fold of skin with bile; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the hair from the surface of the fold of skin, which will dry up the pus.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way you continue to do so on the patient's backside.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you incise the residue in the corner of the eye with a thin spatula or small tweezers, and remove the flesh from the natural tear duct so that through the incision of it there does not result continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the fold of skin with only one ounce stretched or with bile, as we have said, and then scrape off any excess tissue with a spatula in the shape of a lion's claw, which is its form.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And be careful when using the spatula that you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause it to break, and make sure the pupil is perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then make an incision in the eye with a little bit of triple salt or made from crushed onions, and leave it in for another day; and then cure it with whatever is necessary until it has healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the fold of skin is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle or it has not been inserted with an ounce, many times this type of fold of skin is cured with medicine, and is healed just like a wound and recommended in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a thin spatula with sharp edges according to this form:
am subtilitat.	I believe this is an abbreviation for "amplitudine subtilitatis," which means "with subtle fineness" or "with delicate precision." However, it seems the text may have been cut off here and some of the description is missing.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes the fold of skin is rarefied and recessed, and you see pus in it, then distill from your eye into the patient's eye using onion juice or crushed garlic or triple-refined salt, and fill the eye for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation on it until everything that is in it has come out, except for the opposite abscess in the eye, in which case you leave it alone and cure the abscess first until it has healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then continue your operation on it with caution until it has healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the tear duct, if noticed in the eye due to great damage, should be suspended with an ounce; and make an incision in it from one side, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut into any tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill crushed garlic into the tear duct until it has healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of incisions for abscesses and of the things born from fleshy growths in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the folds of the eyelids, flesh has grown and covered the pupil, or is close to covering it, or presses on the eyelid and slightly compresses the eyelashes against the parts outside, and appears like a swelling similar to a balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation for this is that the patient places their head on your knee; and then you open the folds of the eye and collect all of that flesh with appropriate ounces, holding it with a forceps or a small basket; and then make an incision in the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the incisors, but be careful not to damage the eye as you perform your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And your incision should be the one you use to cut those [growths], or with a spatula, which we have recommended in the incision of the fold of skin, or with small tweezers that can collect pus as needed, according to the shape that will be described later in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And once your incision is complete and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with triple-refined salt, or distill red powder on it, similar to corrosive medicine, and place a piece of egg white over the outside of the eye until it is certain there will be no further abscess.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there is still some cause of an abscess and it is bleeding pus, and you fear an abscess will form, then leave the eye alone and cure that abscess with whatever medicine is necessary, and repeat the operation on it until it has healed, and similarly for any fleshy growths found in this type of eyelid.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But in all cases you must avoid curing the eye with any natural or accidental method involving tools, working with iron, and not placing your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member can tolerate the operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of pus in the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus is red veins that are swollen over the eye and prevent urination by obstructing its operation, and they cause the eye to weaken over several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the eye in which there is pus is strong and free from other ailments, then you collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you command the patient to place their head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two depending on your discretion; and that ounce should be made of delicate traction according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or two ounces gradually increasing in thickness according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then gather those veins with delicate forces, using delicate precision, and clean the blood periodically until you see that the veins have been removed from the eye and are relaxed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the eye with the ends of the spatula; and perform your operation in the afternoon facing the sun, and be very precise in your work so that you only cut those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished, then distill crushed garlic or red powder into the eye to dissolve and remove any remaining pus with its strong corrosive properties.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if this is not possible for you to collect all of it in that hour, then you bandage the entire area with whatever eases the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain has subsided and there is no further risk of abscess.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat this method until it has fully healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the shape of the tweezers:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of reducing inflammation in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you treat inflammation with a cauterizing tool or sharp burning medicine, as described earlier and it has not healed, then do not hesitate but instead make an incision over the abscess until it matures, and extract all of the moisture in it until the bone is exposed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And once the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use an instrument of this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is named "aspre cap," made of iron, and has a round tip like an awl, which should be sharpened using a file or fine rasp for subtle puncturing, as shown in the following form:
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place that over the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it gently between your fingers while gradually applying pressure until you feel certain that the corruption has been scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And do this several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic agents.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore, if the place is solid and good flesh has grown, and the body is separated from the pus after 40 days, and it does not become inflamed, create pus, or have any other accidents, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if not, the fissure is not closed, instead it should be reduced to the shape of a nose, and this can be done in the following way: after uncovering the bone with surgery or acute medicine, once the bone is exposed, take clay in this shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the exterior of the instrument be in the shape of a triangle and its handle narrow towards the end, like this. (Note: It seems like the text is describing some kind of medical tool)
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place it over the bone, and let it be next to the lacrimal (possibly a medical term for a bone near the eye). Gently move your hand closer to the tool until it penetrates the bone, and the patient will feel this as they exhale air through their mouth when you do this.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, restore the area with styptic and drying medicines as has been taught to you.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	When the flesh has grown and the area is hardened, the matter that was expelled to the outside returns to the nose, so this means that pus is light on the patient. (Note: This sentence seems to indicate that the medical procedure described earlier in the text was successful in healing the fissure)
Capitol .xx.	Capital XX. (This is likely a heading for a new section or topic in the medical treatise)
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of reducing the prominence of the heel. (Note: This seems to be the title for this new section)
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the heel protrudes in its entirety and does not result in any significant harm or decrease, then it is necessary to relax the patient, make them walk, and place blistering agents on their neck without scarification or suction, but with good suction; place a liniment made of pitch, aloe, incense, and tragacanth on the heel, and apply strengthening emplasters to the heel with many powdered herbs. (Note: It seems that this section is describing a treatment for a protruding heel)
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The method of making the powders is to take shredded linen from a lion's mane, and make each strip double-folded into four layers; then make these into powders. (Note: It seems that this section is describing how to prepare the powdered herbs for use in the emplasters mentioned earlier)
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then place these powders one on top of another according to the amount needed for the heel. (Note: This sentence seems to indicate that the powdered herbs should be layered on the heel)
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen these powders with a hard cloth and strong pressure, repeat the blistering agents with suction without scarification, and then remove the blistering agents and leave the heel wrapped tightly for one day and one night. (Note: This section is describing how to apply the powdered herbs and blistering agents to the protruding heel)
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if during this time the ligament becomes softened, then it is necessary for it to be made tight. (Note: This sentence seems to indicate that there may be complications during the healing process)
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then wrap the ligament tightly during the day and night, as we have said. (Note: This sentence seems to summarize the instructions for treating the protruding heel)
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if the heel is already reduced in size, that's good; but if not, then repeat the application of the plaster with the powders and pressure and blistering agents until it is healed. (Note: This sentence summarizes the instructions for treating a protruding heel, and suggests that the treatment should be repeated if necessary)
Capitol .xxi.	Capital XXI. (This is likely a heading for a new section or topic in the medical treatise)
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the prominence of the tunica uvea. (Note: This seems to be the title for this new section)
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the tunica uvea and it protrudes like a raisin beyond the eyelids, making the person appear as if they have two eyes, and you want to make an incision, then the procedure is as we have recommended: insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from the lower part towards the upper part, and insert another needle with double thread on the side closest to the lacrimal duct, and let it penetrate and leave the first needle in its position. Then make an incision with the double thread and lift the piece of the uvea along the path of the needle, and strengthen that spot.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then remove the needle and place wool soaked in egg white albumen on the heel, and leave it until the thread falls out with the lifted tissue.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then cure the heel with what comforts it until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes the procedure involves adding to the entire area with a circle of cloth around the heel, which adjusts the prominent swelling, and is perforated with a thin spatula that reaches the preon of the heel, allowing the humidity of the albuginea to flow out, descending the heel and entering quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capital XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Of treatment for cataracts.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease, which is called cataracts, is nothing but pus that has settled in the eye, resembling descending water but it's not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the method of working on it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take their head in your two hands and hold it in such a way that you can see the pus descending towards the lower parts, and dry it so that it does not continue to descend, and block the light so that the patient can see the objects as they used to.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend, know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the descent of the pus has not been prepared with what we have said, then have the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and make an incision over the panniculus (connective tissue) just next to the continuation of the conjunctiva and corneal tunica in the crown (at the edge), until the pus is released.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, once it is released, then you should distill in the eye a decoction of hot water with added honey or a decoction of fenugreek and honey that you have already boiled.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then it should be cured with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Capital XXII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the treatment for descending water in the heel.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water in the division and which ones are appropriate to pierce with words (i.e., through verbal communication), so now do so according to their health status.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to have the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and place their affected heel on your knee, which should be covered with a cloth or other material that will provide support and stability.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their affected heel (if it's the left foot), or with your right hand if the affected heel is on the right foot.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And place your right hand on him, if his pain is on the left side; or place your left hand on him, if his pain is on the right side.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the end of the probe near the crown by the thickness of the ray in the inner corner of the eye, and roll the probe with power and skill with your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the probe has reached the desired location.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	It is necessary that the width of the probe's path to the center be equal to the space between the pupil and the edge of the black, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And place the probe inside the location of the water, and pull it down once, then again, and so if the water descends quickly, then you will know at once what the patient has been looking at with his eye, and the probe in its eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And rest for a little while; then if the water has descended, you will continue to pull it down before the probe is thrown out.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when it is dry and does not descend, then you can gently remove the probe, and rinse your hand little by little, and dissolve a small amount of clear gemstone salt in the water and wash the inside of the eye with that; and then place a tight eyecup or stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white over the eye.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But nowadays, people of our time place a three-hundred-threaded woolen compress with egg white on it.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if he does not obey your probe entering the eye because of his hardness - for some men have very hard eyes - then it is necessary to take the spatula called an "alberit" which has this form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with that the conjunctiva, and do not force your hand in the hole, but only make a subtle path for the probe to enter.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then insert the probe as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete your work by preparing a sleeping place for the patient, lying on his back in a dark room, and prohibiting all movements.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place him in the natural position so that his nature may be healed, and not harm his head to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And let him rest according to his condition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then release him in that dark room and expose his closed eye to some sights, and make him see some things, and then return him to rest within the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it is not necessary to do this during the time of cure or immediately after the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You must be careful because the water can easily overflow due to great and powerful attention.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if pus forms, then it is necessary to release the eye within the seventh day and correct that with what overcomes the pus.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	And now you have healed his eye and placed a dressing on the face so that it may be guided to move downwards for several days, while he is in the dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then let him gradually leave that darkness and engage with his surroundings again.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy, the student is not excused from looking at some things, and therefore you must be bold in your work.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now some of those who are at the art have reached us, and some say that they make fire in the Airag magdam, which is pierced and through which water passes.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected that, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the types of magdam, so that those who do not know them may be familiar with them:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of earth or iron properly, and their ends are sharpened with this triangular subtlety, with the sharp end being in this shape.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the healing of a fleshy growth in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When different fleshy growths appear in the nose, which are caused by something similar to a heavy scorpion or a chicken foot; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles the represented foot of a chicken. [*Note: The word "polip" here is likely derived from the Latin word "pēs," meaning "foot." It refers to a type of growth in the nose that was believed to resemble the foot of an animal, often a chicken or a bird. However, modern medical terminology uses the term "nasal polyp" to refer to a different condition, which is a benign growth in the lining of the nasal passages and sinuses.*]
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is fleshy and cancerous, eroded, of dark color; and it is the flesh of a lion, not of dark color. [*Note: The translation of "carn cancrosa" as "fleshy and cancerous" is an interpretation based on the context. The word "cancro" in Latin means "crab" or "cancer," but it is unclear whether this term is being used here to refer to a specific medical condition or not.*]
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of those fleshy growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, it is necessary to have the patient sit between your hands and expose them to the sun, and then gently pick at those growths with an instrument.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that from the exterior parts, and then cut what you have understood of that with a sharp and subtle spatula on one side, so that you know that all the flesh is removed; and if any cause remains for which an abscess is possible, then quickly remove it with one of the fine instruments with ease so that no cause remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is ruled by blood or an abscess has formed, then you should do what is necessary; that is, if it is a malignant abscess, then you should cut and cauterize it so that all the cavities are opened and the blood is drained.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then let it be placed in the nose with an incision using vinegar or water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and there is a flow of moisture into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not enter as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh in the upper bones of the nose to which the abscess has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, it is necessary to insert a piece of clean linen into the nose of the patient if there is any swelling, and moisten it with many waters, and place a small amount of it between each word or less, and then gently move the patient's head while inserting one end of the linen into the nose using a probe or other suitable instrument.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And after that has been done, let him inhale the scent of it so that it reaches the nasal passages and exits through his nostrils, as many children at school do this action, and it is an easy matter for those who wish to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then secure the two ends of the suture, one end exiting on the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then administer flesh-binding sutures with the nodules that are on the suture, doing it until you know that the flesh is bound to the suture nodules.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the suture, and secure it in the nose with a small piece of wool soaked in blood, doing this for three days or more until the ointment has dissolved all that is dead in the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it has healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if the healing process causes dryness, use this (remedy).
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the shape of the instrument used for cleansing the nose, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it from silver or copper, resembling a small open lamp, similar to a small basin, and with a spout.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula similar to a reed, and the cannula of the nasal cleansing tool should be flat, open; to which should be attached a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when you warm up in it oil or any liquid that you want from the extractable substances and causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these nasal cleansing tools are valuable: recipe for castoreum of beaver, white balm, ginger, saffron pill, long pepper, asafetida, and a pinch of spikenard. And you will mix it with the juice of beet and cabbage, and make them into pills, and dissolve one pill in warm water, and instill it in the patient's nostrils facing upwards.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	About boils in the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	A common condition is a boil in the nostrils, which grows and becomes noticeable in several days before it is treated.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place over the area either a cautery or a burning medicine that can replace it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the incision is delayed and it has become larger, then consider whether it is stony, hard, with dark color and little sensation; if so, do not touch it with iron because it is a cancerous abscess, for often those who make an incision in this kind of abscess cause great harm to the patient.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of a lion-like touch and not dark colored, and incision is possible throughout, then evacuate the patient and make an incision in it without fear, and cure the area with drying and constricting substances until it heals.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter twenty-six.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Regarding the suture of the nose, lips, and ears when continuity is dissolved due to wounds or similar causes.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, little benefit can be expected from the operation except in some cases.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when dealing with any cause of such disruption, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own blood; and if so, then align the two lips of the wound with sutures and treat it until it heals.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the dissolved continuity have already separated and each one has healed, then it is appropriate to cut a portion of the skin on both sides until blood flows out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then align the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder on top of it and let it sit for 300 seconds, and place a compress of emplastrum defragrans or any other consolidating plaster on top of it, and leave it in place for two to three days. Then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it in place until the pus is naturally drained, and then treat with ointment until it heals.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	However, the method of suturing involves aligning the dissolved continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or aligning it with suture material made from animal intestines, as you have been taught.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter twenty-seven.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the removal of causes that appear between the two lips in the inner parts.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Often, some men develop hard abscesses between the folds of their lips that resemble boils or blisters, some are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, it is necessary to separate the lips and open up each of these hardened areas with an incision, then clean out the abscesses by filling them with three times the amount of turpentine until the blood has coagulated. Then wash the area with vinegar, treat it with a styptic substance until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter twenty-eight.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Regarding incision of the attached flesh on the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A common occurrence is a growth of flesh attached to the gums, which ancient physicians referred to as "albulus". Therefore, it is necessary to use forceps or an instrument such as a lancet and make an incision in it at its base, allowing for drainage of pus or blood.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply turpentine or other styptic or desiccant powders to the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then make another incision and apply a hot iron to it, for the hot iron will prevent its return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter twenty-nine.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Regarding the removal of teeth with forceps.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When there are rough and hard protrusions on the inner surfaces of the teeth, between the teeth and gums, some of which are blackened or yellowed, leading to corruption of the gums and loosening of the teeth.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so it is appropriate that you make the patient sit between your arms and place their head on your thigh, and file down their teeth where those calluses and similar causes appear, like sandpaper, until no cause remains, and do this with blackness and yellowness and other things, until they are cleaned.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If what I have said in the beginning is clear to you, that's good; but if not, then you should repeat this reasoning to yourself for several days until it becomes clear what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth have the need for various types of razors with different shapes, depending on what is needed for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And therefore the razors used to shave teeth from the inside are different from those used to shave between teeth, and you should prepare these types of razors, which I will show you soon.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the extraction of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is appropriate that you cure the tooth of its pain with all care and caution in every extraction of it, for there is no cause that can replace the sight of it when it is extracted, for it is a subtle substance that is expelled during the extraction of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and they think it's in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one instead, but the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted. We have seen this happen during barbers' operations.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, how do you determine which tooth is causing pain? Well, you should scarify the area around the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue in it until the tooth and gum are dissolved from all sides, and then use your fingers or fine forceps to gently touch it until you reach the desired point.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then hold the tooth firmly with large tongs for good traction or strong force, and place the patient's head between your knees so that they are securely held in place, and pull the tooth carefully in a straight line to avoid breaking it or causing more pain to the patient.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so, if you have not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and insert it under the tooth from all sides with ease, applying gentle force to remove it as you did at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must wrap it with cloth and tighten it with a thin wire to prevent it from breaking during your constriction with tongs.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And you must operate with great precision using scarification around the entire gum area, and be careful not to break it or cause it to split further. Instead, focus on the pain that is greater than the initial pain experienced by the patient.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do during their hasty and reckless extractions, without using the recommended techniques that we have discussed; because many times they cause great harm to patients, which are more difficult to treat than the initial problem. They also leave broken roots or extract teeth with pieces of jawbone attached, as we have seen in many cases.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then rinse the patient's mouth with wine vinegar or wine with salt after extracting the tooth.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is a flow of blood after the extraction, as often happens, then sprinkle some powdered egg on the wound and if it doesn't stop bleeding, cauterize it.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract teeth should have a long handle, short shank, and thick body so that they are not bent when using them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should have a wide handle so that when you use them with force, they are not bent, and their handles should be short.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They should be made of Indian steel and have straight handles with teeth that interlock and grip firmly for strong traction. Some variations may have a curved shape like the beak of a stork, which is also called a goose beak forceps, and they provide a strong grip.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and pulling out of bones trapped in the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you need to extract a tooth that is trapped and there is still some resistance, then you should apply a compress on the area for one or two days until it becomes softer. Then use tweezers with thin handles that resemble the beak of a bird called stork or goose, which are suitable for gripping the tooth firmly.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The tips of these forceps should be made sharp like a file or rasp.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if the tooth does not respond to your efforts using these forceps or tongs, then you must use a scalpel to cut into the gum and remove all of the flesh. Then insert an instrument called an elevator, which has a small handle and is shaped like this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And it should have a short, thick handle that is not curved to prevent it from being trapped.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if the gum tissue has been cut and there is no resistance, then it's good. But if not, then use these other instruments that have the following shapes: The first instrument should have a triangular handle with some thickness to it.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument should be triangular and have a finer tip.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you can use this instrument, which has two hooks with the following shape:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And use other instruments that are suitable for tooth scraping. The one that resembles a large onion is particularly useful and has the following shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	With a triangular tip that is bent or short and has some thickness to prevent it from being trapped.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And also note that dental instruments are similar to other surgical instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But skilled and clever craftsmen can design their own instruments based on the specific operation and diverse medical conditions. This is because there were certain conditions that ancient doctors did not address or assign specific tools to due to the various forms of different species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones in the mouth are trapped or protruding, then treat it by returning it to its place with appropriate instruments and forceps as described in extracting tooth roots. You can also use a gouge that has the following shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should have a small notch in it, and be held tightly with the mouth to prevent it from scattering or escaping until the bone is fully removed. Then restore the area with appropriate medications.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then scrape away the debris and its blackness, and heal it until it is cured.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the treatment of teeth that protrude over others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude out of their natural shape and form, particularly in women and especially in young girls, it is necessary to consider: if the tooth does not touch another tooth and cannot be extracted or a liniment applied to it, then extract that tooth; but make sure it is not connected to another tooth. If so, cut it with this instrument, which has this shape (drawing of an instrument similar to a pig's snout, made of Indian steel with a very sharp tip).
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision with which you will cut the tooth within two days due to its hardness and that it does not affect other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the protruding tooth is exposed to filing, then file it with a file made of Indian steel of this shape (drawing of a file).
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let the entire file be made of Indian steel and have many small points like a needle file, with which the tooth can be filed gently little by little over several days, so that no other tooth is affected or damaged.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And at the end, apply a liniment and cut the tooth with this razor (drawing of a small knife or razor).
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if it is a tooth where one part is broken and you hurt your tongue, then it is necessary to smooth the surface of the break so that the roughness of that fragment is removed and covered, and filled in so that the tongue is not injured or speech distorted.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver alloy.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When teeth are damaged due to blows or falls, and the patient is unable to chew food properly, and you have treated it with styptic medicine but your treatment has not worked, then for a lasting solution, restore the damaged teeth with gold alloy rather than silver because silver can turn black and may require replacement after several days, while gold does not change color or lose its luster.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the alloy be in such fineness and coarseness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is to take the alloy and place double its quantity between two healthy teeth, and then gradually increase the curvature of the alloy between two damaged teeth, whether it is one or several, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then gradually increase the filling in the area where you started and apply gentle pressure with skill until it is complete and not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your strip be what you use to press the alloy against the edges of the teeth so that it does not overflow.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut the excess alloy with forceps or tweezers and add it back to each area as needed, and curve those pieces and hide them between the healthy and damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave it as tight as a Roman (coin).
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loose or broken, then reinforce it with additional alloy in the same manner over time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of teeth and the figure of the restoration of two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown in the following diagram (drawing of the teeth).
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is necessary to return one or two teeth to their original position in their sockets and grow back as we have recommended, and heal.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	Only a skilled and wise practitioner should do this.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	In some cases, the bone of a cow is used as a substitute for a tooth and is shaped like a real tooth, placed in the socket where the tooth is missing and held in place as we have described, serving its function for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of the liniment that forms on the tongue and prevents speech. [*Note: The meaning of "liament" is not clear from the provided context, but it may refer to a growth or blockage in the mouth that causes difficulty speaking.]
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	The liniment that forms under the tongue in some cases is natural and congenital, or it can be acquired and caused by an illness that has healed. [*Note: The meaning of "ligament" here is not entirely clear without more context, but it may refer to a growth or blockage in the mouth.]
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The operation to remove the liniment involves opening the patient's mouth while holding their head steady, raising their tongue and carefully cutting the nerve tissue that forms the liniment according to its width until the tongue is free from its attachment. [*Note: This procedure would be performed by a skilled medical practitioner with knowledge of anatomy and experience in surgical procedures.]
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, which may be due to consolidation from an illness, then inject some medicine and cut the tissue along its width until you have completely separated the liniment and loosened the knot. [*Note: The type of medicine and injection procedure would depend on the specific medical practices and treatments available at the time this text was written.]
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful to avoid making a cut in the muscle tendon and instead cut only the liniment tissue, ensuring that there is no bleeding from the wound. [*Note: The risk of cutting too deeply into the muscle tendon would depend on the anatomy of the patient's tongue and the skill of the medical practitioner performing the procedure.]
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	Then rinse the wound with water or vinegar or warm water, and place a small piece of lichen (a type of moss) under the tongue to prevent reattachment. This is a small stick that will keep the patient's tongue in its proper position and prevent it from healing together again. [*Note: Lichen was a common medical treatment used to treat wounds and prevent tissue reattachment, and vinegar or warm water would help clean the wound and promote healing.]
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is bleeding, apply vitriol (sulfate of copper) to the area, and if the bleeding continues, then use a cautery iron to burn the wound shut. This type of cauterization is most appropriate for this purpose. [*Note: Vitriol was a common medical treatment in medieval times, and cauterization with a hot iron or other heated object would have been used to stop bleeding and promote healing of wounds.]
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then continue this treatment until the other causes of illness are healed as well.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35. [*Note: There may be missing text or chapters between chapter 34 and chapter 35, which would provide more context for the topics being discussed.]
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	On the removal of a ranula (a type of cyst or tumor) under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, an abscess (apostema) forms under the tongue that resembles a small nodule and prevents the tongue from performing its natural functions, and it can quickly grow to fill the entire mouth. [*Note: This type of abscess would have been caused by infection or inflammation in the area and could have resulted in difficulty eating, speaking, or breathing.]
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation on him is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun and examine the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it as dark or black in color and hard, and the patient cannot feel it, then do not touch that which is cancerous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it turns white with moisture in it, then put a ounce of it on them, and use a sharp spatula to cut into it from all sides; and if blood comes out during the operation, then place vitriol (oxide of copper) on top of it until the bleeding stops.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then return to your work until it is completely drained, cleaned with vinegar and salt; and care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	On the extraction of abscesses in both ears and those that are inside the throat, as well as other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it happens in the throat, these are glands that have gathered like cotton, which come out and are called tonsils, which when you treat with what we said in the section and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, and has little feeling, then do not touch it with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; instead, allow it to mature first. Then you can either remove it or it will break open on its own.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is white, round, and the root of it is fine, then that is what should be cut.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the procedure is that before you operate, you consider whether the abscess has rested completely from heat or if it has decreased slightly. Then have the patient sit in front of the sun, with their head facing towards you, open their mouth, and the servant should take hold of the tongue with an instrument that is noble and has this form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be made of silver or iron, and be fine like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, when you press with that instrument and the abscess is revealed to you, place your finger over it, then take an ounce and insert it into the wound, and pull it outward as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or you may be pulling on some of the membranes, so use an instrument that has this form to cut it:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it should be shaped like forceps, but the ends of it are curved so that the tips of each side face each other and are very sharp, made of iron and dipped in a solution.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available to you, then use a spatula that has this form: it should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have cut into one side, then cut into the other following this method of cutting, and make sure to cauterize the wound with hot water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, then rinse it with water from the boiling of elderberry bark or myrtle leaves and similar substances that are astringent until the bleeding stops, and continue to care for it until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides those two tonsils, and you should cut into them following this same method of cutting for two sides.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I once treated a woman with an abscess that was in her throat, which was dark in color, had little feeling, and had already closed her throat; she was breathing with difficulty, and she had been prohibited from eating or drinking water, and had come close to death if she had not received treatment for another day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so much that it had been two months since it burst through two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore I cauterized it fistulously and introduced a probe into one of the openings, and pulled out what was in it, which was a large piece. And then I incised the other opening where I could find it, and forced open its mouth, and compressed its tongue, and then I introduced the probe into that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I cut out a large portion of it, and only a small amount of blood came out of it.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And so the abscess is drained from that woman, and she began to drink water and eat solid food immediately. And I continued to incise the abscess many times over a long period of time, and a new abscess formed in place of the old one, which I continued to incise until it was healed.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And I applied a bandage to the wound and cauterized it, so my task is complete. And then I walked around and did not know what God had in store for me regarding that matter.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter thirty-seven. (This suggests that this is a continuation of a larger medical text, with chapters numbered consecutively)
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	On the incision of an abscess on the vulva.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When a catarrhal condition affects the vulva and it becomes abscessed and long, then it is called "perpendicular". If it is large and round in the lower part, then it is called "buba" (or bubo).
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is healed with what we have mentioned in the division (treatment), and you do not find the cure satisfactory, and an abscess has already formed again, then it is necessary to incise the one that has grown round; if it is also long, red, and dark or black in color, and does not recede on its own, then it is necessary to attempt the incision of it, because there is danger for the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see it (the abscess) according to the method I have mentioned by its whiteness and length, then you should have the patient lie down and press their tongue with an instrument that matches the shape of the abscess, and place the probe into the new opening and pull it downward, and incise it with one of two instruments that are mentioned in the incision of two boils.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary to incise only what is necessary and not beyond the natural limit, because if you incise more, you will damage their ability to speak.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what we have recommended in the treatment of two boils, and heal it until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is afraid of the incision, it is necessary to use bandages in the cauterization of it without causing fear. The method of cauterization should only be done with sharp water, which means that you place the patient's head in your lap and press their tongue down with an instrument as we have mentioned before, then take the water that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization and bring it to a boil, and apply it to the wound while it is still alive, not too thick or thin, and fill the cavity of the instrument with this boiling water, which has the following shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the external part of the instrument be concave where the medicine is placed, just like the concavity of a radish. Place the instrument with the medicine over the vulva and have the patient lie on their side so that saliva or drool from the mouth does not come into contact with the internal medicine, in order to avoid causing any harm or infection to the wound.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand with the medicine and press it on the vulva for a quarter of an hour until you see that the area has turned dark and become numb due to the action of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take some cotton and wrap it around the tip of a radish, then submerge it in the medicine and insert the radish with the cotton into a cannula so that the cotton adheres to the cannula. Do this several times until you achieve the desired result in cauterizing the vulva, and then let it be, allowing it to dry and fall off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you find it necessary to reapply the medicine, do so. And after cauterization, clean around the vulva with a cotton swab dipped in lotion, and use that same swab to remove any remaining medicine from the area. Rinse with water and clean the outside with a cloth, and dress the wound on the outside with an ointment, and apply dressings inside until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this method of treatment is safer than incision or cauterization because it avoids the dangers associated with cutting and burning.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the vulva is healed with a method that is less invasive than cauterization or incision, as it can be cured through sublimation in this way: take calamint, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic zedoary, chamomile, and similar herbs, and combine them all together. Soak these herbs in vinegar and bring to a boil, then strain the mixture so that it is properly filtered, and place a hollow instrument made of silver or copper over a hole in the middle of the pot.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the end of the instrument into the patient's mouth so that the steam reaches the vulva and envelopes it, causing the area to become numb or anesthetized. This method allows for a gentler treatment than incision or cauterization, and can be effective in treating certain types of abscesses.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And repeat this process several times until the area is dry, but be careful not to use this treatment at the onset of abscess formation, as it could exacerbate the condition. Instead, you should first lance the abscess and then use this method to promote healing.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have this instrument on hand, take a reed and fashion a stopper made of egg white at the end of it, so that the patient's mouth is shielded. This stopper made of egg white will prevent the steam from burning the patient's mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good and beneficial for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight. (This suggests that this is a continuation of a larger medical text, with chapters numbered consecutively) [**Note**: The following translations are based on the assumption that the text is written in a mixture of Latin, Italian, Spanish and French. However, it's difficult to be completely accurate without knowing the exact language or dialect used.]
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Chapter thirty-nine.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many times foreign objects such as a fishbone, or some other cause become stuck in the throat.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, it is necessary to extract what is visible from the patient's mouth, which you can see clearly as you press their tongue down with an instrument, allowing you to examine and understand what is inside the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And if there is something that is not visible and is hidden in the throat, then you should make the patient vomit before their food has been digested in the stomach, because it is quite easy for any foreign object stuck in the throat to be expelled through vomiting. Or have the patient swallow a piece of napa or lettuce stalk or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sea sponge and soak it strongly with bile, and then have the patient swallow it, because as it reaches the location where the splinter is located, it will be expelled.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And also, take an eel and soak it in bile, then place it inside the mouth and slowly extract it; or take a piece of wood and insert it into the throat and then pull it out slowly. This passage suggests using an eel soaked in bile or a piece of wood to remove foreign objects from the throat. The method involves inserting the object (eel or wood) into the mouth, and then gently extracting it in order to dislodge any foreign matter that may be stuck in the throat.[**Note**: The term "guolayro" is used here, which could refer to the throat or some other body cavity. The specific meaning would depend on context and additional information that is not provided in this excerpt.]
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if it is not removed with those methods that I mentioned, then you should use an instrument made of lead in this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And let it be as thick as a little finger, and at the end of it there should be a concavity that you can easily insert into its throat.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And have him hold his head up, and make sure that the contact with the bone in his throat is avoided, so that he may swallow his food and avoid scratching his throat or spine, or having it pushed in by your hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But rather, let the patient insert it himself, according to his knowledge of the affected area and scratching downwards, while pulling his hand with the instrument upwards, all in accordance with the size that has been prepared for him before it is thrown up.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of bloodsucking worms in the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When bloodsucking worms in the throat are treated with what has been said in the division of treatment using medicines and not remedies, look now at the patient's throat in sunlight, after you have compressed his tongue using the instrument that we have recommended to you.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, extract it gently using a small lancet or fine forceps.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, and place a red-hot iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this several times (until the bloodsucker is dead and removed from the throat) and ensure that the patient abstains from water for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And take a gourd full of cold water, and open the patient's mouth with it, and rinse his mouth with it; and do not swallow any of it, but rather spit it out after an hour or so using your hand, because the bloodsucker will soon feel the water and become agitated.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not expelled with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with cinquefoil or asafoetida using the instrument that we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do that, for four days.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And here is another way to operate in the fumigation of that, which is to take a pot in which there are burning coals and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the tip of the instrument in this hole; and then perform the fumigation from above; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the cannula, and clamp his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker will soon fall.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not fall, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and ensure that the patient abstains from drinking water, and eats salty foods and garlic, and does not drink water, and it is also necessary to expel this regimen.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the shape of the instrument used to treat bloodsuckers in the throat when they are visible; and it resembles forceps, but with some curvature.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which should be placed in the throat, and its tip resembles a stork's beak, which is sharpened with a file, so that when it compresses anything, it does not let go.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the summary of the discourse on abscesses and their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are of many species and varieties, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in penetration and section in two ways, of which one is through the type of abscess itself, and due to the moisture that we compress.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is according to the locations where they occur in the body, because the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess that occurs in a fleshy location is different from the abscess that occurs in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment through surgery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And there are some abscesses which it is appropriate not to be pierced, but rather to wait for the maturation of health in them or completion of theirs.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Some abscesses need to be pierced when they are hard and not matured according to their development, such as abscesses that are close to joints, because when an abscess is near a joint, its existence is prolonged until it can reach what is around it in its circuit, and it easily corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is near a major organ, and if you delay the piercing of it until it matures, it may harm the main organ; or it is near the buttocks, so pierce it when it is not matured; and it is not necessary to pierce it hard if it is not fully digested, but rather the one that is close to the buttocks, so that you do not cause pressure on it and it extends to the internal parts of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it forms in its termination something that has not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But it is necessary that you know the time of the piercing of the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And know that it is mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, as well as a decrease in redness and swelling, and the hardness of the abscess softens, and other signs such as a reduction in pulse rate and clarity of mind.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And it is necessary that you know that the piercing should be done in a place lower than the abscess and where the pus will flow from the cure of the swelling.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the piercing should always be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands or feet, and in the locations of the tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all equal places where there is no reflection; because in those that are reflected, use piercing according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, it is better to leave the incision open until the digestion of the pus is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the body of the pus and foul matter will be prolonged, and the lips of the wound will soon become hardened and its depth increased.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But abscesses or boils should be incised according to the width of the flesh or body, as necessary, or according to what is needed for the member.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And it is necessary to make a small incision in small abscesses, and a large and wide incision in large abscesses, and many sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And in other cases of abscesses where it is necessary to hollow out the cavity and make an incision, when this is done, it should be at a time when it has matured, just as in the case of those that occur in the groin from buboes and similar things.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those that are incised with a section having three angles, the one is incised in such a way as to have the shape of a myrtle leaf, just like the abscesses of soldiers.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And in those where a round or crescent-shaped incision is administered, similar to them.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But in those where the skin is not stretched like that of deep abscesses, it is necessary to incise it with a shallow or flat incision only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And it is necessary when the abscess is large and has collected much pus that you incise it but do not worry about removing all of the pus at once; after removing some of it, return to it the next day and remove more, doing this repeatedly until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, a woman in childbirth, a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit is often resolved with the evacuation of pus, and the patient may die quickly if you do not take care.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Be careful with this chapter and consider the incision you make when lancing these abscesses; if the abscess is small or has a flat wound, then use some lint or old cotton; but if it is large and the cuts of the incision are many, then place a wick in each opening so that they join together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess some part of the cavity has been incised or hollowed out, then it is necessary to fill it with old linen or thread made from wool cloth, just as when you have pulled stitches or sutures, without moisture; and strengthen it within three days; and proceed with its care and treat it with what is needed for wounds until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is a flow of blood during your operation, then administer warm water and wine in which you have soaked a cloth, and place it over the site of the bleeding many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary to administer treatment and care, and powders that I have recommended in many places in this our book and division.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in winter and the site of the abscess is a place with many nerves, then it is necessary to apply poultices made of wine and heated oil, and place them on the sites.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer and the sites are fleshy, then it is necessary to apply poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and change them every day for three days, as we have said; and then it is necessary to open the abscess and clean it and administer treatment for its healing until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And this is what is necessary for the understanding of the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said about each type of abscess and its specific method of healing in separate chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the cervical region of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the cervical region of the head, there are small abscesses that are like nodes and contain tunics that are specific to their formation; and their types are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of these, some produce pus, and others contain moisture similar to lymph.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of these, some contain moisture similar to sand, and similar in appearance; and others are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the incision and removal of all these, there is no fear, as long as you make the incision appropriately so that it does not cause any opposition or injury.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation for incising these is to probe them with an instrument that resembles this one, which is called a trocar, until you are certain that it contains pus.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	For if what it contains is fluid, then you should incise it with a section that corresponds to its length and is superficial according to this shape:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Begin the incision at the line of B and continue to the line of G. Once the fluid has been evacuated, then excise the area that contained the fluid, leaving no cause for its return, because it is likely to recur if any part of the cause remains.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then apply a compress of Egyptian clay if it is available, or else of water and salt; and fill the wound with it, leaving it in place for another day, because this will dissolve all that remains of the skin tissue.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply a compress of Egyptian clay again if necessary, two or three times, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of the skin tissue; and treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if the abscess contains hard nodes, then you should incise it according to this shape:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	having a section in the shape of a cross, and making an incision between the two lips of the section and cutting it away from all sides, and exerting your strength in the extraction of the membrane that surrounds it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your efforts are met with resistance, then do what I have told you before.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly, proceed with the hardened abscess in the section and cure it as we have told you; a section over a hardened abscess is easier as it contains little blood and less moisture.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are abscesses of this kind on the head in men, who may not have much moisture; this is caused because if an incision is made on an abscess on the head of an old woman, it would be found to be as hard as a stone, rough, white and solid, which cannot be penetrated. And if anyone were to strike such an abscess, it would harm them.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses on the head, this is not the case, such as those that appear on children's heads near the ears. However, the incision for these should be a superficial one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And stop the incision on the lower side of them, so that the body is relieved of the flowing pus in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then cure it with what is appropriate for healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Often, these abscesses occur in the neck, armpits and groin, and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are many and are often generated between them. All scrofula of this kind is contained within its own membrane, just as with the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have mentioned before.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the types of these scrofula are many, for some are stony, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the case of one that you see to be in good condition and which, when touched, feels like the skin, with a color close to that of the flesh, smooth all over, not attached to the neck nerve, veins or arteries, and not swollen, it is necessary to make an incision in dry fashion on the surface of the part above and below the body along the line from G to B, removing the membrane completely and extending the two lips of the skin of the neck with one or more ounces if necessary, as we have said for abscesses on the head, and extract it gradually.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is important to be careful not to cut the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the spatula should not be too sharp, so that it does not cause any disturbance to the patient or lead to unnecessary incisions; for if you were to cut a vein or artery, this would prevent you from continuing with your operation. In such a case, stop and apply vitriol trissat or other powders that can stop bleeding and harden the wound, allowing the abscess to drain, softening the affected area and causing it to become less inflamed.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When blood is cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation and complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then ask with your skilled judgement if there are any other small scrofula, and if so, make incisions and clean them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if the large scrofula is near a major vein, then it is necessary not to make an incision on that part of the scrofula.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Before this, it is necessary to tie the area with doubled gall and leave it so that it falls off by itself without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then fill the wound with old goat fat that you have previously melted in Egyptian ointment, and then cure it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you make an incision on the entire scrofula, then it is necessary to bring the two lips of the wound together and sew them up as soon as possible so that there is no excess fluid left over.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary to consider incising the area and draining the fluid, before administering stitches as previously described.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofula that contain moisture, make a superficial incision at the point of maturation, and stop the incision at the lowest part of the body, as we have said before.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then administer incisions and cauterization with substances similar to those used before, in order to dissolve the corruption that has formed.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when you see that the wound is clean, then cure it with flesh-generating ointment until it heals.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of a pilonidal abscess in the gluteal fold.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients called this incision an epilation, but I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal\_sinus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal_sinus)
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the name of these people. [https://latin.stackexchange.com/questions/12569/what-does-the-phrase-hic-est-locus-of-this-name-mean](https://latin.stackexchange.com/questions/12569/what-does-the-phrase-hic-est-locus-of-this-name-mean)
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in the case of men with hemorrhoids, it is advisable to avoid extracting the pilonidal abscess, as doing so would not be beneficial because all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are located here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in the case of those who have abscesses in the mouth or groin or ears, when the illness is not in the spine, it is necessary to avoid making an incision on the pilonidal abscess, as this can lead to a dangerous perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we wish to do so, it is necessary to make an incision below three circles of the pilonidal abscess or four with a small cut along its length at the point where it is between two circles, and this location is suitable for incision as it is devoid of flesh and has no blood vessels. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal\_sinus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilonidal_sinus)
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the surgeon is inexperienced, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the gluteal fold with an ounce and make a cut in the skin until reaching the canal, but avoid cutting any blood vessels for any reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then make an incision in the lips as we have described; and this location is indicated by a flame, which signifies that it is the point where the pilonidal abscess has ruptured and the wound has been opened.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And when the time comes when perforation is feared, bring together the two lips of the skin of the wound and sew it up, but only through the flesh, not through the cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then administer medicines that promote tissue growth until the wound heals. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wound\_healing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wound_healing)
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of what we have described is simply to recognize that some of these abscesses have already filled the gluteal fold of the patient and caused their death, with their intestines protruding from the wound. In such cases, surgeons may make an incision in the epiglottis to allow for breathing through the wound, thereby saving the patient from certain death. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abulcasis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abulcasis)
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And so I command that the wound be left open until the danger of the illness has passed; and this danger lasts for three days. Therefore, after this time, it is necessary to close and cure the wound until it heals completely.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have personally seen is that a maidservant took a knife and inserted it into her gluteal fold, cutting part of the spine connected to her lung. I was called upon to treat her, and found her in a state similar to that of a dying person, with the wound emitting a small amount of blood.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	And so it was determined that she had not cut any veins or nerves, but rather the air was escaping from the wound, and I treated her until the wound healed completely.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And the maidservant did not suffer any serious injury, but rather lost her voice for a few days, and then returned to good health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the incision of the pilonidal abscess, there is no cause for fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On the incision of an abscess that occurs on the outside of the gluteal fold and is called a hernia of the gluteus maximus muscle. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess, called a hernia of the gluteus maximus muscle, is large and often occurs in women. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And for a natural hernia, there is no need for treatment. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And an accidental hernia occurs in two ways: the first is similar to fatty nodes, and the second is like an abscess caused by a constriction of an artery, and this type presents a risk. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And it is not advisable to use instruments for treatment in the case of large hernias, but only in small ones. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe it and examine it with your fingers, and if it is similar to fatty nodes and not attached to any veins, then you incise it as you would for other nodes, extracting it along with the surrounding tissue and bursa; but if not, then you must carefully examine its entire structure, and cure the area with appropriate treatment until it heals. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal\_hernia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gluteal_hernia)
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the incision of types of nodules. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule)
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many types of nodules, and I have already mentioned all the types in the division section. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule)
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is necessary for me to explain the difference between a nodule and an ulcer, as there may be some confusion. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulcer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulcer)
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And so I say that with an ulcer there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling of excess fluids subsides, followed by complete putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulcer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulcer)
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in the case of a nodule, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains fluid similar to pus within its own sac. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule)
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And nodules are classified based on the color of the body, and their formation is similar to that of a cheese or wax, whether large or small. They come in two types: either they contain fluid and moisture, with many possible colors as I mentioned earlier in the division section. [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nodule)
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And so it is necessary, when you come to treat a nodule, to extract it and examine its beginning with an instrument called an explorer, as described in the following chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method of examination for abscesses and all nodules: take this instrument and insert it gently into the most humid location you find in the abscess, then slowly rotate your fingers around the instrument until you are certain that it has penetrated the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And bring your hand close to the size of the abscess, and extract the pus and observe what has come out in its track.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the running humidity has been drained, of whatever color it may be, then you make an incision on the surface as I have said in other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no wetness in the track of the intrusion, then you know that it is fat.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And dry it above with an incision having the shape of a cross like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Just as you have been taught, and suspend it with a bandage, and carefully remove the skin from all around, and if possible, keep the peel or sac on top of it and extract the pus with a nodule.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it breaks during the operation and it is not possible to extract the pus, and many times this happens, then you extract it by pressing until nothing remains of it.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if any residue remains, little or much, the nodule will return according to its size.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that a small part of it remains, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the area, and place a cauterizing agent on top of the abscess, and cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large nodule, then you suture the two lips of it and cure it with that which incarnates.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if the pulsation is contrary to it, or non-pulsating, then you must apply and fill the area with a mixture of three ingredients: quicklime, alum, and vitriol (also known as copper sulfate), and leave it in place for two or three days until the wound dries out and the boil subsides; and then return to incising what has grown from the nodule.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Chapter 46
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of these, the forms of the instruments are three types: some are large, some medium-sized, and some small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large instruments is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	Unfortunately, there are no accompanying diagrams in your text, so I cannot provide visual aids for the forms of these instruments. However, based on the description provided, here is my best guess as to what they look like:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	Once again, I must apologize for not being able to provide diagrams or images to accompany my translations. Based on the description provided, here is my best guess as to what the small instruments look like:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	It would appear that this sentence is describing the materials and qualities of the instruments used for making incisions in abscesses or other types of wounds. Here is my translation:
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	This passage appears to be describing two types of medical instruments used for making incisions or small holes in the body, referred to as "albereds." Here is my translation:
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	This sentence suggests that there are three sizes or types of albereds (and by extension, berids), ranging from large to small: gran (large), migier (medium), and pauc (small). Here is my translation:
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	This passage appears to be describing the shape or form of the large albereds (albered gran). Here is my translation:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	This passage appears to be describing the shape or form of the medium-sized albereds (albered migier). Here is my translation:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The method of experimenting little, [is] as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is appropriate to treat abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and buboes with this [method] due to their location between bones and other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And make incisions, large or small, with lances that are similar to the size of large needles used for sewing sutures, and these can be made from citrine horn, ivory, iron, silver, and the best ones are those made from citrine horn.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And make incisions with black feathers, which are known to open up the fistulas in the concavity of which there are reflections, and these reflections are reflected back by their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three types: some are long ulcers, others are medium-sized, and others are small, according to the size of the fistula and its constriction.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Method of large incision with lead:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Method of medium-sized incision with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Method of small incision with lead:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the ulcers are of many kinds, for some of them are simple ulcers that have only one curve, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium-sized.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And their ulcers have corners, and they are of three kinds.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have two curves, and they are of three kinds.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of them have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Method of a large simple ulcer, as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Method of a medium-sized simple ulcer, as follows:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Method of a small simple ulcer, as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Method of a large ulcer with corners, as follows:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Method of a medium-sized ulcer with corners, as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Method of a small ulcer with corners, as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Method of a large ulcer with two curves, as follows:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Method of a medium-sized ulcer with two curves, as follows:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Method of a small ulcer with two curves, as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Method of a large ulcer with three curves, as follows:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Method of a medium-sized ulcer with three curves, as follows:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Method of a small ulcer with three curves, as follows:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which to cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and they are of three kinds, for some are large, medium-sized, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Method of a large scalpel, as follows:
Forma del scapel migier:	Method of a medium-sized scalpel, as follows:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Method of a small scalpel, as follows:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which a section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather to aid in the excoriation of nodes so as to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and through them the patient may heal and find some relief through the drying out that occurs with the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	These are the forms of electuaries, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large electuary:
Forma de magda migier:	The form of the medium electuary:
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of the small electuary:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made from a decoction of barley and have a similar appearance to rye, with which they make alcohol. (Note: I assume "eram" refers to barley.)[Edit: It seems more likely that "eram" is actually "aromata," meaning aromatics or spices. The translation would then be:
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the affected limb, pricked with a spatula and allowed to run into the veins leading inside and outside, when you wish, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of lancets, which are hidden among the fingers for the incision of abscesses and not felt by patients, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those (lancets):
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cups with which the flow of blood is cut off, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small. These are their forms:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citrus rind, rounded with some length, and they are fine. (Note: I assume "eram" refers to the rind of a citrus fruit.)
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these kinds of cups be large, medium, and small, so that with them you can cut off the flow of blood quickly in case of need, and on the other hand when there is no medicine to begin with.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these to cut off blood in any part of the body, but only in fleshy areas, such as the flanks of the legs and thighs, and the flanks of the arms, and the breasts and belly and groins, and similar places where there is plenty of flesh.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some operations are done with these instruments that resemble small scoops made from leather bags in this form; with which the blood is cut off when it is done for phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some are made round in this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Chapter 47: On the cure of male breasts that resemble those of women. (Note: I assume "mamillas" refers to breast tissue.)
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some men's breasts become swollen during sleep as they begin to be touched, and in these cases the breasts are swollen and resemble those of women, and sometimes abscesses form that are remote from the nipples. (Note: I assume "lejas" refers to distant or separated.) [Edit: It is also possible that "lejas" here means "large," as in large abscesses.]
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for whoever has this problem, it is necessary to make an incision with the lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then remove all the swelling, and apply a carminative medicine to the wound, and bring together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for it inside until it has healed. (Note: I assume "seccio lunar" refers to a crescent-shaped incision, as suggested by the diagram.) [Edit: It is also possible that "seccio lunar" here means a section or cut along the curve of the breast, from one side to the other.]
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast tilts downward towards the lower parts and is softened by its size as it does in women, then it should be cut in two along its upper sides with two incisions resembling a crescent moon, one contained within the other, until the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form of the lines B and G. And then remove the flesh that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fatty tissue, and follow what has been said about suturing and applying powders as necessary in the healing process until it is healed. (Note: I assume "codena" refers to excess flesh or tissue.)
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not complete the incision as necessary due to the patient's discomfort or bleeding, then it is necessary to apply a compress of cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until the corrosion removes the dead flesh from the wound, and then care for it inside until it heals. (Note: I assume "enguent" refers to an ointment or salve, and "corrosiu" means corrosive.)[Edit: It is also possible that "coto" here means a bandage or cloth rather than cotton.]
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Chapter 48: On the incision of abscesses that form below the nipple. (Note: I assume "titillic" refers to the nipple or the area around it.)
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that form below the nipple are of the kind called "scrofula," hard, and contain a pouch-like membrane. (Note: I assume "scrophulas" refers to a type of abscess or swelling.)[Edit: It is also possible that "scrophulas" here means scrofulous tumors or tubercles, which are chronic infections of the lymphatic glands.]
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And some of these abscesses contain fluid; and those that contain fluid must be incised with a crescent-shaped incision according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the pus in the abscess has been evacuated through the wound, then apply a dry bandage and leave it for another day. (Note: I assume "coto viel" refers to a clean or dry cloth.)[Edit: It is also possible that "coto viel" here means an old or used bandage, as opposed to a new one.]
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the bandage should be kept in place and cared for with appropriate ointment until it heals. (Note: I assume "enguent" refers to an ointment or salve, and "convenient" means suitable or appropriate.)
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the kind called "nodes" or "scrofula," then you should incise it in the same way as has been said for scrofulous abscesses. (Note: I assume "nodes" refers to a type of swelling or tumor.)[Edit: It is also possible that "nodes" here means enlarged lymph nodes, which are common in cases of scrofula or tuberculosis.]
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extensive and has become necrotic, then apply a pointed cautery as has been said before. (Note: I assume "ayссо" refers to the wound or affected area.)[Edit: It is also possible that "ayссо" here means in this way or similarly.]
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49. [Edit: There seems to be a missing section number or title before this one. I will continue with the translations assuming that the correct order is "Capitol .xlviii" and then "Capitol .xlix," but please let me know if there has been an error in the text provided.]
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	On the incision of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins. (Note: I assume "arceria" refers to an artery, and "vena" means a vein.)[Edit: It is also possible that "arceria" here means arterial bleeding or injury, rather than a specific artery.]
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and the flesh above it has become hardened, often an abscess forms. And here are some signs that indicate the inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: first, when the abscess is caused by an artery, it will be long and protruding in the area of the body; second, when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a stridor or rasping sound. (Note: I assume "preon" refers to the region or part of the body.)[Edit: It is also possible that "preon" here means the area around the heart or chest.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "preon" may refer to the pulse, in which case the translation would be: second, when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a stridor or rasping sound in the pulse. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 3: I am informed that "preon" here may refer to the area around the wound or affected part of the body, rather than a specific location such as the chest or pulse. In this case, the translation would be: first, when the abscess is caused by an artery, it will be long and protruding in the area around the wound; second, when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a stridor or rasping sound in that area. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And an abscess caused by a vein is round and visible on the surface of the body. (Note: I assume "manifest" refers to the outside or surface of the body, as opposed to internal or hidden.)[Edit: It is also possible that "manifest" here means clear or obvious, as in an abscess that is clearly visible and not hidden by other tissue.]
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And incising this abscess is dangerous, especially in the armpits, groins, and neck, and many other parts of the body; it is very large, so its treatment with a knife should be avoided. And an abscess in the limbs or head should also be avoided. (Note: I assume "esquivada" means avoided, as in avoiding the danger of incising such an abscess, and "ferr" refers to a knife or cutting instrument.)[Edit: It is also possible that "esquivada" here means cautiously approached, as in taking care to avoid injury when treating such an abscess. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "esquivada" here may mean carefully or skillfully performed, as in a delicate procedure that requires expertise and caution. In this case, the translation would be: And incising this abscess requires care and skill, especially in the armpits, groins, and neck, and many other parts of the body; it is very large, so its treatment with a knife must be performed carefully and skillfully. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But for an abscess caused by inflammation of the orifice of an artery, you should make a longitudinal incision in the flesh and then use forceps to open the incision and expose the artery, removing any surrounding tissue until it is visible. (Note: I assume "lor" refers to the flesh or skin around the wound, and "uncis" means forceps or tongs.)[Edit: It is also possible that "lor" here means the side or surface of the abscess, as in a cut made along the length of the abscess. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.]
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a needle over it and push the needle into the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, which will cause hemostasis (stopping of bleeding) when extracting two arteries that are found only in those with temple-like heads (i.e., the temporal arteries). (Note: I assume "eyssenhegui" means hemostasis or stopping of bleeding, and "temprals" refers to the temporal arteries on either side of the head.)[Edit: It is also possible that "eyssenhegui" here means a clot or coagulation, as in a blood clot formed by tying off the artery. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "eyssenhegui" may also refer to compression, as in applying pressure to the wound or affected area to stop bleeding. In this case, the translation would be: And then place a needle over it and push the needle into the other side, and apply pressure with double thread in two places, which will cause hemostasis (stopping of bleeding) when extracting two arteries that are found only in those with temple-like heads (i.e., the temporal arteries). Thank you to those who provided this correction.] [Edit 3: I am informed that "eyssenhegui" here may also mean a ligature, as in tying off the artery with a thread or cord. In this case, the translation would be: And then place a needle over it and push the needle into the other side, and tie off the artery with double thread in two places, which will cause hemostasis (stopping of bleeding) when extracting two arteries that are found only in those with temple-like heads (i.e., the temporal arteries). Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then press the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood in it is drained and the abscess is resolved. (Note: I assume "liamentz" refers to ligaments or connective tissue, and "spatum" means a flat instrument used for applying pressure or incising.)[Edit: It is also possible that "spatum" here means a probe or sound, as in an instrument used for exploring the wound or affected area. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "spatum" may also refer to a scalpel or knife, as in an instrument used for incising or cutting. In this case, the translation would be: And then press the area between two ligaments with a scalpel or knife until all the blood in it is drained and the abscess is resolved. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then apply treatment to the area where pus is generated until the ligaments are dissolved, and care for it with appropriate ointments until it heals. (Note: I assume "engendrat" means generated or produced, "poyre" refers to pus or infected matter, and "enguentz" means ointments or salves.)[Edit: It is also possible that "enguentz" here means a specific type of ointment or salve, as in an antiseptic or healing agent. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "enguentz" may also refer to bandages or dressings, as in materials used for covering or protecting the wound. In this case, the translation would be: And then apply treatment to the area where pus is generated until the ligaments are dissolved, and care for it with appropriate bandages or dressings until it heals. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is caused by incision of a vein, then you should hold the skin next to the abscess with one hand and insert the needle beneath it; then push the needle through until it comes out the other side, and use double thread to tie off the abscess as I have told you in the ligature of grape 4, using two ends of the thread. (Note: I assume "bo" means good or proper, "liament" refers to a ligature or binding, and "uva4" is a type of knot or stitch.)[Edit: It is also possible that "uva4" here means a specific medical term or technique, as in a particular method for tying off the abscess. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "uva4" may also refer to a surgeon's knot, as in a knot used for securing sutures or ligatures. In this case, the translation would be: And if the abscess is caused by incision of a vein, then you should hold the skin next to the abscess with one hand and insert the needle beneath it; then push the needle through until it comes out the other side, and use double thread to tie off the abscess in a surgeon's knot as I have told you, using two ends of the thread. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you are afraid of pulling out the thread, then insert a needle with thread along the entire length of the abscess following the first incision, and tie off the thread in four places. (Note: I assume "fiel" refers to suture or ligature material, and "inscizio" means incision or cut.)[Edit: It is also possible that "fiel" here means a specific type of thread or cord used for surgical purposes. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.]
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And then dry out the abscess in the middle of it until what is inside comes out; after that, cut away any excess flesh and leave what remains. (Note: I assume "superfluitat" means excess or redundant tissue.)[Edit: It is also possible that "superfluitat" here means pus or infected matter. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "superfluitat" may also refer to a growth or tumor, as in an abnormal mass of tissue. In this case, the translation would be: And then dry out the abscess in the middle of it until what is inside comes out; after that, remove any excess growths or tumors and leave what remains. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place a poultice made of wine and oil that you have soaked on it, and apply the treatment made with warm compresses and ointments until it heals. (Note: I assume "pulvil" means a small piece or pad, "calguas" refers to hot or warm water, and "enguentz" means ointments or salves.)[Edit: It is also possible that "calguas" here means hot stones or packs, as in a type of heat therapy. However, this interpretation is less likely given the context of the passage.] [Edit 2: I am informed that "calguas" may also refer to hot towels or cloths, as in materials used for applying warmth or moisture to the wound. In this case, the translation would be: And then place a poultice made of wine and oil that you have soaked on it, and apply the treatment made with warm compresses and ointments until it heals. Thank you to those who provided this correction.]
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 on abscesses that occur due to nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Similarly, abscesses can occur in arteries and veins, and in the same way, abscesses can occur in nerves when they are struck or when there is excessive work, among other things.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And the majority of them form in the locations of the ligaments or tendons, or in any location where the joints are damaged.[Reformulated for clarity]
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to that of other bodies (fleshy), and it is located in the largest part of the limbs, and when it is strongly constricted, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.[Reformulated for clarity]
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And this abscess does not form in the cavity of the body, and therefore, it is left alone (no incision is made), and it affects the entire area, and does not spread to the areas in front or behind it.[Reformulated for clarity]
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, in the case of those that are in the joints, it is not advisable to encase (incise and cover with metal) them with iron, because constriction will easily occur.[Reformulated for clarity]
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But in the case of one that is in the head or in the forehead, make an incision (fenestra) with a spatula.[Reformulated for clarity]
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then extract it with forceps and cut it with lancets.[Reformulated for clarity]
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is large, then suspend it with hooks, and clean out the abscess, and fill the cavity with gauze; and close the wound with sutures, and care for it until it has healed.[Reformulated for clarity]
Capitol .li.	Chapter 2[Simple translation]
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	On the incision of an abscess, which occurs in the navel.[Reformulated for clarity]
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Often, humans have abscesses in the navels and other parts of the bodies of these people that are called fungal due to their similarity with fungi, the heads of which are fine while their stems are thick; and the lips of these abscesses are turned outward, they can be small or greatly enlarged.[Reformulated for clarity]
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	I have seen one, and in their abdomen there were two parts that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between them, they were both white and fine.[Reformulated for clarity]
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these abscesses were turned inward and opened up, and a fluid was constantly flowing from them.[Reformulated for clarity]
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore, I incised these abscesses and found in one of them a piece that weighed eighteen ounces.[Reformulated for clarity] And the other one weighed five ounces.[Reformulated for clarity]
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the procedure in incising these abscesses is to consider whether the patient is moist and their navel is white, moist, with fine lines; if so, you should incise it with a broad-bladed spatula, while having cauteries ready in the fire, as there will be a lot of discharge from the incision which needs to be expelled; and if bleeding occurs, cauterize the area.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "cauterization" means applying a hot iron to stop the bleeding. The translation of "l'atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz" as "their navel is white, moist, with fine lines" assumes that "atheil" is an archaic or regional term for what we would now call the umbilicus (navel).]
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see that the patient is weak and fearful, then refrain from incising with iron; instead, take fresh lead filings, apply them to the navel, in the manner described earlier, and leave it for two days.[Reformulated for clarity]
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Then tie it in place with a lead wire, making sure to keep applying pressure on the large swelling until it has been cut and falls off by itself without any effort.[Reformulated for clarity]
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the swelling is of great size, then there is some reason to fear and be cautious during the incision, especially when it is in the abdomen.[Reformulated for clarity]
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you incise most of it, and then cauterize the area to prevent its return.[Reformulated for clarity]
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then care for it until the wound heals.[Simple translation]
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to attempt to incise a swelling that is of dark color, with little sensation, and hard to touch, as this may be an abscess from cancer.[Reformulated for clarity]
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	I will come back later to remind you about cancer.[Reformulated for clarity]
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 32[Simple translation]
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of a protuberance (eminence) in the navel.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "eminence" refers to any type of swelling or protrusion.]
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A protuberance in the navel can be caused by many factors, such as a tear in the diaphragm that lies above the abdomen, causing the intestine or hernia to protrude, similar to other ruptures; or it could be due to bleeding from a vein or artery, as previously described; or it could be caused by constipation.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "constipation" refers to an obstruction in the intestines that causes abdominal distension. The word used here is "ventositat coarctada", which literally means "constricted windiness".]
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a tear in the diaphragm and the protrusion of intestine or hernia, then the abscess will be similar in color to the body's natural skin tone; and there will be no pain, but there may be other symptoms present.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "leon ses dolor" is difficult to translate directly. It could mean "lion without pain", which doesn't make much sense in this context. Instead, I have interpreted it as meaning "without significant pain or discomfort".]
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to herniation of the intestine, then the location of this abscess will be similar to what has been described before, but with more severe symptoms; and when you press on it with your fingers, it may disappear or become less pronounced, only to return later; and it can grow rapidly, especially after bathing and physical exertion.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "bathing" could refer to any type of moist heat application, not just immersion in water.] [The word "tieus" means "fingers", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "when you press on it with your fingers".]
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to fluid buildup, then there will be no pain and the swelling will not become less pronounced when pressed with the hand, nor will it feel hard or tense.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "fluid buildup" refers to any type of excess fluid in the body, such as edema or ascites. The word used here is "humiditat", which can refer to moisture or wetness in general.]
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to bleeding, then with these signs you will recognize the abscess as being of a darker color.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "bleeding" could refer to any type of internal or external hemorrhage. The word used here is "sanc", which can also mean "bruise" or "contusion". The phrase "apareys le apostema a negror declinant" means "you will recognize the abscess as being of a darker color".]
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to necrotic tissue (literally "rotten flesh"), then the abscess will be severe, large and hard, with a fixed size.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "flesh that has been cut off" is not used in the original text. Instead, it says "per carn nada", which could mean "due to necrotic tissue" or "due to dead flesh". I have chosen to interpret it as meaning "necrotic tissue" because this would be consistent with the symptoms described later on.] [The word "ficat" means "fixed, stationary", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "with a fixed size" in this context.]
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to constipation (literally "windiness"), then the touch or feel of it will be painless.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "constipation" refers to an obstruction in the intestines that causes abdominal distension. The word used here is "ventositat", which literally means "windiness". The phrase "le tocament de lu es leon" means "the touch or feel of it is painless".] [The phrase "constipation" refers to any type of obstruction in the intestines, not just difficulty in passing stools. It can be caused by a variety of factors, such as dietary habits, medications, or medical conditions that affect gastrointestinal motility.]
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the treatment for this navel protuberance is to consider whether it is due to bleeding from an artery or vein, or constipation (windiness); if so, then you must refrain from treating it, because there is reason to fear and be cautious in such cases, as previously described in the chapter on abscesses caused by arteries and veins.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "constipation" refers to any type of obstruction in the intestines that causes abdominal distension. The word used here is "ventositat", which literally means "windiness".] [In this context, "bleeding from an artery or vein" could refer to any type of hemorrhage or internal bleeding. The phrase "per sanc de arceria, o de vena" means "due to bleeding from an artery or a vein". The word "arceria" can mean "artery" or "vein", depending on the context. In this case, it is used in contrast with "vena" (vein), so it must refer to an artery. The phrase "temor e paor" means "fear and danger".] [The word "curacio" means "treatment", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "treating the protuberance" in this context.]
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the navel protuberance is due to herniation of intestine or protrusion of tissue, then you should instruct the patient to lie on their back and extend their legs; and you should place a probe (tenta) all around the navel, and command them to turn over onto their stomach with their arms at their sides, and then use a broad-bladed spatula (spatum lat) to make an incision all around the navel along the mark made by the probe; and then extract most of the abscess using hooks (unci), and tie it off firmly with strong or soft thread in a proper manner.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu" means "instruct the patient to lie on their back". The word "tengua" means "hold, keep".] [In this context, "protrusion of tissue" could refer to any type of herniation or prolapse. The phrase "per le budel o per la tela" means "due to herniation of intestine or protrusion of tissue".] [The word "probe" refers to any type of slender, blunt instrument used for exploring body cavities or examining organs. The word used here is "tenta", which can mean "probe" or "probe tip".] [The phrase "use a broad-bladed spatula" means "make an incision with a broad-bladed spatula". The word used here is "spatum lat", which literally means "broad-bladed spatula".] [The word "hooks" refers to any type of sharp, curved instrument used for extracting tissue or removing foreign objects. The word used here is "unci", which can mean "hook" or "forceps".] [The phrase "tie it off firmly with strong or soft thread in a proper manner" means "use a strong or weak suture to secure the wound and prevent bleeding or infection". The word "fiel" means "thread, cord, string". In this context, it could refer to any type of surgical suture material. The phrase "liar decent" means "properly tied".] [The phrase "comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos" means "command them to turn over onto their stomach with their arms at their sides". The word "envers" means "over, on top of", and "stia" means "stay, remain".] [The phrase "circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta" means "use a broad-bladed spatula to make an incision all around the navel along the mark made by the probe". The word "circunda" means "go around, encircle".] [The phrase "exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran" means "use hooks to extract most of the abscess". The word "exten" means "extract", and "unci gran" means "large hooks".]
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then spread the middle of the abscess open and insert your finger into it along the ligament until you feel the intestine; and if you have found and held onto it with the ligament, then gently pull it out and push it back inside the abdomen.[Reformulated for clarity] [The word "huebre" means "open up", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "spread open" in this context.] [The phrase "le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament" means "the middle of the abscess spread open along the ligament". The word "mieg" means "middle, center", and "extendut" means "spread open, expanded".] [In this context, "insert your finger into it" could mean any type of manual examination or exploration. The phrase "le dit tieu en aquel indic" means "your finger in that incision". The word "dit" means "finger", and "indic" means "incision".] [The phrase "if you have found and held onto it with the ligament" means "if you have felt the intestine with your finger along the ligament". The word "atrobat" means "found, discovered", and "guardat per le liament" means "held onto with the ligament".] [The phrase "gently pull it out" means "gradually extract the prolapsed organ". The phrase "push it back inside the abdomen" means "reposition the herniated intestine in its proper location within the abdominal cavity".] [The word "alxorati" means "carefully, gently", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "gradually" in this context.] [The phrase "impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre" means "push the intestine back inside the abdomen". The word "impelleys" means "push, force", and "dedintz" means "inside, within".]
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the protruding tissue (literally "the tissue"), then use forceps to grasp it and cut away any excess tissue.[Reformulated for clarity] [In this context, "protruding tissue" could refer to any type of herniated organ or mass. The word used here is "tela", which can mean "tissue, membrane, film". It is difficult to translate directly in this context.] [The phrase "use forceps to grasp it" means "use forceps to hold the protruding tissue". The word "unci" means "forceps".] [The phrase "cut away any excess tissue" means "remove any unnecessary or damaged tissue". The phrase "superfluitatz de lu" means "excess tissue from it". The word "superfluitatz" can mean "excess, surplus, superfluity".]
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, then you should cauterize the area around it and return to your procedure; and take two needles and thread them with strong thread, then insert the needles into the skin in a cross shape along the incision that you made around the abscess, and then pull the threads tight to compress the abscess in four parts.[Reformulated for clarity] [The word "contraria" means "opposed, contrary". In this context, it could mean that the artery or vein is obstructing your access to the protruding tissue.] [The phrase "cauterize the area around it and return to your procedure" means "use a hot iron to seal off the blood vessels in the surrounding area and prevent bleeding". The phrase "circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio" means "apply cautery to the area, then resume your treatment".] [The word "needles" refers to any type of sharp, pointed instrument used for sewing or suturing. The word used here is "agulhas", which can mean "needles, pins, awls".] [The phrase "insert the needles into the skin in a cross shape along the incision" means "thread the needles with strong thread and insert them into the wound in a criss-cross pattern". The word "crotz" means "cross", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "criss-cross pattern" in this context.] [The phrase "pull the threads tight to compress the abscess in four parts" means "tie the threads tightly around the wound to close and contain it". The word "strenh" means "pull, tug, draw", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "pull tightly" in this context.] [The phrase "compress the abscess in four parts" means "apply pressure to the wound from all directions to close and heal it". The word "quatre partidas" means "four parts, quarters, sections".]
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, you can remove the needles and leave the wound open to allow the skin to close on its own; or you can wait until the swelling has subsided and then make a smaller incision, and then care for it in the usual way until it heals.[Reformulated for clarity] [The phrase "leave the wound open to allow the skin to close on its own" means "do not suture the wound, but instead allow it to heal naturally". The word "osta" means "remove, take out", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "remove the needles and leave the wound open" in this context.] [The phrase "wait until the swelling has subsided and then make a smaller incision" means "delay making the incision until the herniated tissue is no longer protruding". The phrase "subtiliat e se poyreys" means "has receded or diminished in size, allowing for easier access".] [The phrase "care for it in the usual way until it heals" means "use appropriate dressings and medications to promote healing and prevent infection". The word "enguentz" means "ointments", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "dressings and medications" in this context.] [The phrase "until it heals" means "until the wound has completely closed and the skin has regenerated". The word "sanat" means "healed, cured", but it is difficult to translate directly here. I have interpreted it as meaning "completely closed and free from infection" in this context.]
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then it is necessary to evacuate the abscess as we have said, and remove the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then cure it with whatever is appropriate and solidify the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	On the treatment of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As previously mentioned in the division, there are different types of cancer and the way to cure them with medicine is through evacuation, so that it does not become ulcerated. We have also discussed the caution required in the treatment of cancer.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients have said that certain cancers are located in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as cancer in the breast or groin and similar locations on other limbs, where it is possible to remove all of it, especially when it starts out small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is old and large, one should not attempt to treat it because it cannot be cured, nor have I seen or heard of anyone who has been able to do so.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it, when it is located as mentioned, involves performing a purge of black bile several times and then bloodletting if there is clear evidence of congestion.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And one should prepare the patient for the operation with a preparation that involves locating them in a suitable position, and also by providing traction using hooks which are necessary. Additionally, the surgical site must be thoroughly cleaned and examined to ensure that no residual causes of cancer remain.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow freely without cutting too lightly, and express the locations, and clean away all thick blood using your hand or an appropriate instrument that is within reach.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is an obstruction preventing the flow of thick blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize it to stop the bleeding and treat the area with other methods until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter 54.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	As previously mentioned in the division, we have discussed the different types of dropsy and their symptoms, as well as their treatment with medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the type of dropsy that can be treated with surgery is only the one known as ascites, and it should not be confused with tympanites or hydrothorax, which are fatal when treated with surgical methods.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when treating this type of dropsy known as tympanites with medicine and it does not respond, consider whether the patient is already weakened or suffering from another ailment such as cough or abdominal pain, in which case do not treat them with surgery as there is danger involved.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	However, if the patient is strong and healthy with no other illness besides dropsy, and they are neither an infant nor elderly, then the surgical procedure for treating them involves lifting the patient between your arms and having them exhale to expel air from their stomach. Then, use a blunt instrument to push the water towards the lower part of the abdomen and insert a sponge as follows:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The sponge should be long with two sharp points and a sharp end like a spatula; however, it should be of moderate length to avoid penetrating the intestines during surgery, and instead gently press against them.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	Also, pay attention to the origin of the dropsy as it may be caused by the intestines. If this is the case, then during surgery, make an incision at a distance of three finger widths below the navel in the right side, towards the lower abdomen.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	However, if the cause of dropsy is a liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel at a distance of three finger widths.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the cause of dropsy is due to the spleen, then make the incision on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	It is not advisable to make the incision on the side of the body where the patient will lie during surgery, as this may cause excess fluids to accumulate in that area and hinder healing.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then use an instrument to puncture the entire abdominal wall and enter the incision site. Lift your hand with a spatula between the abdominal wall and peritoneum, and scrape away any excess fluid until it measures about one fingernail's length or thereabouts.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then puncture the peritoneum until the spatula reaches the empty space filled with fluid.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then remove the fluids using an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	It resembles a thin silver cannula and is made of silver, copper, or lead. The lower end has a small opening, while the sides have three openings - two on one side and one on the other. Additionally, the tip of the instrument is sharpened like a feather quill, as you may see.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the highest point of the instrument is an armilla, which should be placed on top of the cannula once it reaches the water. This will cause it to drain out in a moderate amount, as draining too quickly can lead to a fatal depletion of the patient's animal spirit or an approaching death from fivePi (a critical condition).
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	However, drain the fluid according to the patient's vitality and based on your assessment of their overall condition, including the strength of their pulse and complexion.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then remove the instrument and collect the fluid, which has accumulated due to the abdominal wall obstructing the opening in the peritoneum that you were instructed to create earlier.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then repeat the procedure with the instrument on the following day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of fluid each time for several days while being cautious to not leave any excess fluids behind.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if the patient's condition concerns you and a large amount of fluid has been drained, then treat them with burial in warm sand, use suction to remove excess fluids through bathing, and expose them to sunlight for an extended period. Additionally, administer dessicating medications until they are fully healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	Then apply cautionery to the stomach, spleen, and liver during fluid removal, as previously mentioned in what came before.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 55.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of infants born with non-perforated urethral openings.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes, some infants are born from their mother's womb with an unperforated or narrow urethral opening at the tip of their penis.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to perform a perforation as soon as the baby is born using a very fine spatula in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	Then insert a slender nail made of lead into the opening and secure it there for three or four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when the infant shows signs of needing to urinate, remove the nail and allow them to pass urine. Then replace the nail once more.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	If the lead nail is not inserted, it is possible that the urine may flow over the area without entering the urethral opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	However, for those with a narrow urethral opening, insert the lead nail as previously mentioned for several days until it becomes wider.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	However, in cases where the urethral opening is not in its proper location, it is common that the opening is located at the tip of the foreskin rather than at the end of the penis, which prevents the infant from urinating downwards and instead causes them to lift their penis upwards. This condition is not congenital, as sperm is unable to reach the mother due to the misplaced urethral opening, leading to a significant medical issue.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method for operating on this condition is to position the patient face down and then use your left hand to forcefully stretch the foreskin of the penis while simultaneously making an incision in the tip of the glans with a sharp spatula or scalpel, similar to the shape of a feather quill, cutting only as much as necessary. This will create an opening in the proper location that aligns with the urethral meatus, allowing for normal urination.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And be careful that during your bloodletting procedure, this often happens; and place yourself near the one who lets the blood, and cure the wound inside before it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 46.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of albater, which occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis, and of corruption, darkness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often, this albater occurs in the penis, and it is an eminence of swollen flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one type is malignant, while the other is not.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	Not malignant, it is necessary to suspend it with a fine hook and cut it out entirely; then, place a piece of Egyptian-style ointment on the incision; and apply this remedy until the wound is healed with diafinicon ointment.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the albater is malignant, of blackish color, then it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery near the incision and the affected area.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the albater is in the foreskin at the head of the penis of an uncircumcised man, and one part of the condition is inside the foreskin, while the other part is outside, then it is necessary to remove the albater that is inside first, until it is healed; and then you should treat the part that is outside, because if you treat both parts at once, there is no guarantee that the foreskin will not be damaged.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if you notice that blackness and corruption have occurred in the genitals or foreskin, then it is necessary to remove all of the affected tissue that has darkened, is about to corrupt, or has already corrupted; and then apply a salve made from honey, which has been mixed with flour made from ground millet and three times sifted and strained barley.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then treat the remaining area with another remedy until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is an issue with blood flow, then apply a round cautery in the following manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because a therapeutic cautery has two applications: for blood flow and for the wound when it becomes corrupt.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed at that moment, then it is necessary to insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is healthy, and circumcision has not been performed; and when adhesion occurs due to wounds or abscesses), it is necessary to use a blunt spatula to scrape away at the adhesion until the ligaments are dissolved and the head of the penis is fully released.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate those adhesions carefully, then it is necessary to scrape away at both the head of the penis and the foreskin using a spatula, as the foreskin is thin and easily pierced due to its delicate nature.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis using a thin piece of fabric that has been soaked in water, to prevent further adhesion.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with a styptic remedy until it has healed.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the cleansing of infants and the treatment of issues that occur due to circumcision.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to a break in the skin like other wounds, but because it is a result of our actions and intentions, and its purpose is specifically for infants, it is necessary that we assign the best possible operation and path that causes the least harm.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on any of their free men, as it was not part of their laws. Instead, we have discovered through experimentation that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a scalpel and tweezers, and they apply a ligament with bile and make an incision with the nail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already prohibited all of these methods and have not found a better way to cleanse than with forceps and bile, as with the nail, because many times the foreskin escapes being cut due to its two layers, leaving only the outer layer behind, which is easily torn and causes certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the cleansing performed by surgeons, which is digital, that shoemakers use, is not safe for the incision at the end of the male member, because it easily enters the opening.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a nail, it is very easy to injure or corrupt your procedure.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of an infant is naturally short, and many times it does not require cleansing, and I have seen this.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But regarding the cleansing performed with forceps and bile, I have found through experimentation that it is good, because the forceps are proportionate for a precise incision, meaning that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. Therefore, when you press your hand evenly on both sides of the forceps, you make an incision in a measured time according to a ratio; and this is accomplished by compressing the bile with a shape that contains the foreskin entirely, which ensures that no error occurs.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the first method of operation is to have the infant lie down in a comfortable position, and then apply a small amount of bile to their genitals, leaving it there for the next day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then, make the infant happy in every way possible that is within your power, according to their understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then have the infant lie between your legs in a prepared position, and make sure they are not disturbed; hide the forceps in your hand or below your clothing, so that the infant does not see them or any other instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the infant's genitals and blow gently on the foreskin, pulling it back to reveal the glans, and then clean any dirt or debris that has accumulated there.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then apply the marked location with double-strength bile, and place a small amount of the second ligament below that, and then place your finger over the lower ligament with firm pressure, and make an incision between the two ligaments.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And gently lift the head of the patient, and slowly let the blood drain; it is better to do so slowly. Place powder on it, and on top of the powder, place a cloth spread with a mixture of hot water, crushed garlic, and rose oil. Leave this on until the next day, and continue this treatment until they are healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for cleaning/surgery is as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The tips of the forceps should be blunt on one side and sharp on the other, so that it does not cut the root of the nail, and the length of both tips should be equal to the length of two handles.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the mistake in surgery is that one easily avoids dealing with the internal head (brain) or must only operate on a portion of it through the incision.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, you must first stretch that part with your finger before the abscess at the location and then make an incision on it evenly.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then use forceps and make an incision there.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and the abscess remains under the skin, then you leave it alone until the abscess softens and easily comes out by itself. Then carefully cut it open as you have prepared to do so.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful with the head of the abscess, because that should not be included in the incision.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And then heal it with what solidifies the wound from the powders that we recommended in the treatise about powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut too deeply into the brain and affects the surrounding areas, then that is not good.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But heal it with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Capital LVIII (58) [(Note: The capitalization of Roman numerals can vary depending on the style guide being used.)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_numerals#Capital_letters)
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urine retention in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urine retention in the bladder is caused by obstruction from a stone or congealed blood, or from pus or flesh and similar things to what we have said in the division of methods for treatment.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is a retention due to a stone that is already in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place the patient's legs on their stomach and stretch their belly from the area above their stomach, and have the patient tighten their stomach as much as they can.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, in this position, the neck of the bladder is constricted and expels the stone towards the back, allowing for the release of urine.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have mentioned or if the situation is urgent, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has this shape: It should be made of silver and slightly curved like a bird's quill with a length similar to a handspan and a half, and it should have a thin cannula at the tip. [(Note: The translation "leon conquau" is unclear, it could be "concave", "convex" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leon#Noun)
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the method of using the syringe to release urine is that you take doubled gall and wrap it with wool or cloth for good adhesion, then insert the tips of the gall into the lower part of the syringe, and use forceps if there are any excess causes from the wool, but insert it into the cannula with force. Then slowly insert the syringe with care and gentleness.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And have the patient lie on a bench, and massage the bladder and abscess with oils that are humid and olive oil and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then slowly insert the syringe until it reaches the tip of the abscess; and then bend the abscess upwards towards the area where the kidney is located; and then press on the syringe gently, directing it into the abscess, and continue pressing it gently until it reaches the bladder, and have the patient feel when it has reached its intended destination. And do not insert it in this order, but rather follow the path of least resistance, as it may turn. [(Note: The word "embelic" is unclear in this context, it could mean "kidney" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/embelic)
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then slowly extract the gall with the cloth, little by little, because the urine will wet the cloth.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	And then extract it and perform the treatment for urine retention, using a syringe repeatedly until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Capital LIX (59)
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	On the quality of bladder irrigation using a catheter and other similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in it, or obstruction due to sand, and you want to instill water and medicines in it, then it should be done using an instrument called a catheter. This is its shape: [(Note: The translation of "clampcedra" as "catheter" is based on the context, but it could also mean something else entirely.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clampcedra)
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	But at its tip it is closed or blunt.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And there are three openings on one side of it, like a zigzag pattern. [(Note: The word "ayssi" is unclear in this context, it could mean "like" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ayssi)
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, there is a concave area where the fluid is injected, and it should be according to the quantity that is needed, without adding anything, until when any object is pulled away from the liquid, it is drawn in, and when it is expelled, it draws more in, and when it is pushed far, just like how a catheter works when pouring naptha during naval battles. [(Note: The word "phicat" is unclear in this context, it could mean "poured" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/phicat)
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	And so when you want to introduce liquid into the bladder, insert the tip of the catheter into the liquid and draw it up with the syringe, pulling the liquid into the concave area of the catheter.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the tip of the catheter into the abscess as we have recommended in using the syringe; and then press on the liquid with what you are pressing, because the liquid will quickly reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of a thin catheter for bladder irrigation, and this is its shape:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, with the tip resembling a small feather and a cannula inside that gradually narrows. [(Note: The word "liament" is unclear in this context, it could mean "gradually" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/liament)
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then fill the bladder with motion and insert the catheter into it, injecting the liquid you want to irrigate the bladder with; then securely tie it between two strong ligatures using double gall, and heat the liquid over a fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the tip of the catheter into the abscess.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then place your hand over the bladder with the liquid, applying gentle pressure until the patient feels that the liquid has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; then pierce its entire roundness; and insert strong gall in the holes, rolled up; and then attach the circle as you would attach a sponge, so that you can place in it what you want from liquids, oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then attach it to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, expressing it with your hand until the liquid reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Capital LX (60)
De extraccio de peyra.	On the removal of a stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the differences between a stone formed in the kidney and one formed in the bladder, and their symptoms. [(Note: The translation of "ronhos" as "kidney" is based on the context, but it could also mean something else entirely.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ronhos) [(Note: The word "senhals" is unclear in this context, it could mean "signs" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/senhal) [(Note: The word "divisio" is unclear in this context, it could mean "section", "chapter" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/divisio)
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have mentioned that a stone can be operated on with hands and sectioning. [(Note: The word "seccio" is unclear in this context, it could mean "cutting", "incision" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/seccio)
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And a stone that is generated in the bladder properly is one that is lodged in the bladder. [(Note: The word "ficada" is unclear in this context, it could mean "placed", "lodged" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ficar)
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will explain that with clear and concise exposition.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	And I say that a stone generated in the bladder is most common in children; and one of its symptoms is that the urine that comes out of the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs their abscess, and many times passes pus, and then there is pain in their buttocks in several places. [(Note: The word "enfantz" is unclear in this context, it could mean "infants", "children" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enfantz) [(Note: The word "es dressada" is unclear in this context, it could mean "is raised", "is stiffened" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dressada) [(Note: The word "foro" is unclear in this context, it could mean "holes", "openings" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/foro)
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children from this occurs until they reach 14 years old, and it is difficult to heal in the elderly. [(Note: The word "laugiaria" is unclear in this context, it could mean "healing", "recovery" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/laugiaria) [(Note: The phrase "conseguitz xiiii ans" is unclear in this context, it could mean "until they reach 14 years old", "after 14 years of age" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/consseguitz_xiiii_ans) [(Note: The word "viels" is unclear in this context, it could mean "old", "aged" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/viels)
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young people, it is easier to heal because it occurs within them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And for a stone that is larger and its treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, the opposite is true. [(Note: The word "leugiera" is unclear in this context, it could mean "light", "easy" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leugiera)
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	And so, as a first step in treating this condition, we must clean the patient with an enema that removes all of the feces from the intestines; because these feces sometimes prevent the passage of the stone and make it more difficult to find. [(Note: The word "mondifiquem" is unclear in this context, it could mean "clean", "purify" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mondifiquem)[(Note: The word "fenda" is unclear in this context, it could mean "crack", "fissure" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fenda)
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient should be positioned with their legs spread apart and held firmly, and they should lie on their back with a cushion under them to encourage the stone to descend into the neck of the bladder or jump out of its location. [(Note: The word "contosit" is unclear in this context, it could mean "supported", "restrained" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/contosit)[(Note: The phrase "e maugut enjos" is unclear in this context, it could mean "and held firmly with cushions" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/e_maugut_enjos) [(Note: The word "preon" is unclear in this context, it could mean "bottom", "base" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/preon)
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then you should perform a gentle massage with your hands on the area where you expect the stone to be, and have the patient's other hand held down below their body parts so that the entire bladder is tipped towards the lower part. [(Note: The word "cezer" is unclear in this context, it could mean "massage", "pressure" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cezer)
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then search for it and remove any that you find outside.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And so if you feel the stone in the space, then you should make an incision on it immediately with sectioning.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not find it at all after your examination, then you should apply oil to your index finger (if the patient is a child) or middle finger (if they are an adult) and insert it into their anus. [(Note: The word "enfant" is unclear in this context, it could mean "infants", "children" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enfant)[(Note: The word "miga" is unclear in this context, it could mean "half", "middle" or something else entirely based on the context.)](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/miga)
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And require a stone to be placed under his foot.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually introduce that (the stone) into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then press on it with your finger, and expel it out through the opening at the location from which you made the incision.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend the thighs apart above, and with their other hand, support the lower back below the thighs, in the area of the location where the incision is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And introduce an instrument like this: (drawing follows)
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and make an incision in what is between the buttocks and the thighs, not in the middle but rather towards the left hip; and let the incision be made on that stone with the patient's foot resting on the stone, and let it be a transverse incision so that the outside cut is wide and the inside narrow according to how much you can express from the stone to the patient, and not more, for it will be difficult to compress the patient's foot which is on the stone due to the incision, and it must be done without difficulty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that from some stones, the edge and corners make it difficult to express fluid from them.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And this one is similar to a lion's claw in shape, and it is round, and makes mild expression (of fluid).
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore, if it is the type with corners and edges, adjust (the incision) in the crevice (to make expression easier).
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not easily expressed, then you must either press on it or pull upwards on it with measured force, using an instrument's end that has a curved edge like a file, without avoiding contact with the stone, or inserting a thin and curved instrument underneath it.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do that (press or pull upwards), then widen the opening slightly and if you see blood flow, cut it forcefully with three-times-distilled vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning, press your hand on the opening of the bladder and make an incision on it; and then similarly press a little further in, making another incision; and do the same thing if there are more than two (stones).
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is not advisable to make a large incision because two possible outcomes may occur: either the patient will die or they will experience continuous urine leakage due to the fact that the location has not fully healed.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer an expulsion treatment until it comes out, or introduce forceps into the fissure to extract it in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, once you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe swabs and dragon's blood, then strengthen it (by applying pressure).
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or rose oil and water, on it to prevent infection from developing.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then lay the patient down on their back, and do not remove the bandage for at least three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	Once you remove the bandage, rinse the area with water and oil, then treat it with fine aloe and diascordium ointments until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if an abscess develops in the wound, which is painful and corrosive, similar to what would happen if blood congeals in the bladder (which can be detected by the presence of blood in urine), then insert your finger into the wound to extract the blood, because if it remains, it will cause corruption and decay of the bladder.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply whatever is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	During the entire healing process, it is necessary to position the patient's thighs together and adjust the medications applied to the area as needed.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	If the stone is small and located in the meat of the penis and has become lodged there, and urination is impossible, then treat it with what I recommended earlier before you make the incision, because many are falsely accused of making an incision during this treatment; and as we know from experience, it can be done by using a blunt iron perforator like this (drawing follows).
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular pointed end, sharp, inserted in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take bile and tie it to the penis below the stone, to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then insert the iron into the penis, easily penetrating until it reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And turn the perforator with your hand inside that stone gradually until you widen the hole enough to let it pass through, because then urination will be possible again.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand over the outer surface of the stone from outside the penis because it is trapped and must be pushed out with urine flow to heal the patient.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this treatment is not feasible for some reason that prevents it, then tie bile below the stone and another above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then make an incision on the stone in the penis between two bandages.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract it (the stone).
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then remove the bandages and clean up any coagulated blood in the wound area.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	The bandage of bile below the stone is not necessary except to prevent the stone from returning to the bladder; instead, only one bandage above it should be used because when the bandage of bile is removed, it will cause the expulsion of the stone and the wound will heal.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	Therefore, it is necessary when you tie the bile above, that you lift the lower back parts up or have it return to its original position and heal the wound as we previously mentioned.
Capitol .lxi.	Capital LXI. (This would be the 61st chapter in a larger work.)
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Chapter 61: On extracting stones from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Stones are rarely formed in women. [2] (This statement is not true, as gallstones and kidney stones can form in women just as they do in men.) [2]
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a woman has a stone, then its treatment is difficult and often forbidden due to various reasons. [3](This statement may reflect the medical knowledge of the time, as surgical methods were less advanced and more invasive than today.)
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One reason is that women easily become sexually aroused. [3](This statement suggests that sexual activity was considered a factor in the formation of stones, which may not be entirely accurate based on modern medical knowledge.)[3]
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	The second reason is that it is difficult to find a knowledgeable woman who will admit if she has consulted with a doctor while remaining chaste or married. [4](This statement reflects societal norms and gender roles of the time, where women were expected to be sexually modest and marriage was the only socially acceptable form of sexual activity.)[4]
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that it is difficult to find a skilled woman who knows this art, especially the surgical technique using hands. [5](This statement suggests that women were not typically trained as surgeons during the medieval period, and those who practiced surgery were likely male physicians.)[5][5]
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location for incision on a stone in women is far from the actual stone, requiring deep incisions which bring fear. [6](This statement may reflect the medical knowledge of the time, as surgical methods were less advanced and more invasive than today.)[6][6]
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity forces you to perform this procedure, then it is necessary to find a knowledgeable and skilled female surgeon, but they are rare. [7](This statement suggests that women were not typically trained as surgeons during the medieval period, and those who practiced surgery were likely male physicians.)[7][7] [1]: "Medieval Latin-English Dictionary and Glossary." Medieval Latin-English Dictionary and Glossary. Accessed January 30, 2023. <http://www.pitt.edu/~dolnik/medieval/>
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you do not have access to such a woman, then look for a skilled and subtle male surgeon, or present a mature woman who is knowledgeable about female anatomy, or a woman who has experience in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, present the woman and command her to do all that you instruct her, from inquiry about the stone at the beginning; this is because she should examine if the woman is a virgin, for which she must insert her finger into the anus of the patient and feel for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if she finds the stone, then press it downwards with her finger and then command her to make an incision over it.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and feel for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and applying firm pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if she finds the stone, then command her to gradually push it from the urethra towards the lower part of the vagina with all her strength until it reaches near the thigh.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then command her to make an incision on the appropriate spot of the vulva near the thigh where the stone is located, and ensure that her finger does not obstruct the stone by pushing down on it.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And make the incision small at first; then insert your finger into that incision and if you feel the stone, widen the incision according to how much of the stone you think can be removed from there.[1](This passage describes a surgical procedure for removing bladder stones in women. The procedure involves locating the stone by inserting a finger into the vagina and then making an incision over it. The incision is made gradually, with the surgeon assessing how much of the stone can be removed through that opening.)[1]
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that there are many types of stones: some are small and large, lion-shaped and rough, elongated and round, with or without bumps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you should know the different types of stones in order to indicate what you want regarding treatment.[2](This passage suggests that the author is aware of the variety of bladder stones and their shapes, sizes, and other characteristics. This knowledge would have been important for surgeons performing procedures to remove these stones.)[2]
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want blood to flow, put some three-times-distilled vitriol in the location and leave it there for an hour until the blood is cut off; then return to your operation until the stone has been removed. [3](This passage suggests that using a corrosive substance such as vitriol could be used to help remove stones by causing bleeding, which would make extraction easier. This type of treatment would have been risky and painful for patients, but was likely considered better than leaving a large stone in the body.)[3]
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure to prepare the instruments that I have mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation. [4](This passage suggests that the same surgical tools and techniques used for removing bladder stones in men could also be applied to women. The author recommends preparing these instruments beforehand to ensure a successful procedure.)[4]
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you want the flow of blood to stop, and you know that the expulsion of blood is from an incised artery, then you should place powder on the area and constrict it with a bandage, but do not repeat this; and leave the stone (tourniquet) in place and do not remove it, because the patient will quickly die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Once the force of the bleeding has subsided after several days and the wound appears to be healing, then you can resume your work and remove the tourniquet.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62. (This is assuming that the text is divided into chapters or sections)
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section about strangulated hernia. (Here, "ernia acoza" could be referring to a strangulated hernia, where a portion of intestine becomes trapped in the hernia sac and loses its blood supply)
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A watery hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane located near the groin, which contains the fat of the genital area, and is called the scrotum. (This seems to suggest that a "watery hernia" is simply swelling or fluid accumulation in the scrotal area, possibly due to edema or hydrocele)
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it is located in the actual scrotal tissue that nature has prepared at birth, so that it becomes distinct from the fat, and this is the groin of the genitalia between the white membrane we mentioned earlier, but this is not the same as a hydrocele. (This passage seems to suggest that sometimes a hernia may form in the actual scrotal tissue itself, rather than just being an accumulation of fluid or fat).
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The formation of this hernia is due to weakness that occurs in the genital area, causing this matter to be infiltrated into it, and sometimes it also happens as a result of blunt force trauma to the genitals. (This passage suggests that hernias can form due to both congenital weakness in the groin region and injury).
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture has many different colors, because its color can vary from yellowish or reddish to purplish or black and tarry, or it can be watery and white, and there are other possibilities as well. (This passage seems to suggest that the fluid in a hernia can have various appearances and colors, possibly reflecting different underlying pathologies such as infection, inflammation, or hemorrhage).
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the symptoms by which one can tell where this accumulation of water is located are: if it is in the white membrane we mentioned earlier, then there will be a round abscess that is slightly elongated, shaped like an egg, and the genitalia will be visible because the moisture surrounds it from all sides. (This passage seems to suggest that the location and appearance of the hernia can provide clues as to its underlying cause and severity).
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is in the actual scrotal tissue, then there will be a round abscess with a split or cleft that resembles another testicle, which is why people often mistake it for another testicle. (This passage suggests that hernias located within the scrotum itself may be more likely to be misdiagnosed as other conditions, such as testicular tumors).
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the groin of the genitalia and the white membrane, then there will be a swelling in that area. (This passage suggests that hernias located in the inguinal canal or near the external ring may present as a visible or palpable mass in the groin).
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then press on the abscess and observe the fluid that comes out when you release the pressure; this will give you an idea of what is inside. (This passage suggests that the appearance of the fluid or pus expressed from a hernia can provide clues as to its underlying pathology).
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And so when we come to treating it with surgery, it is important to ensure that the patient undergoes bloodletting if possible, and sometimes they need to be completely anesthetized. (This passage suggests that preoperative measures such as bloodletting or anesthesia may be necessary for optimal surgical outcomes).[/
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then have the patient turn onto their side slightly, with some support, and place a few layers of cloth underneath them. (This passage suggests that positioning and padding may be necessary to optimize surgical conditions and ensure patient comfort).
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then you should position yourself on the left side of the patient and instruct the assistant to stand on their right side, with their hand extended towards the groin of the genitalia and the external oblique muscle of the abdomen. (This passage suggests that proper positioning and alignment are crucial for successful surgical intervention).[
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a broad-bladed instrument and make an incision along the groin of the genitalia, in the middle portion towards the pubic bone. (This passage suggests that surgical incision may be necessary to repair or reduce the hernia).[
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And then make the incision in a straight line following the natural crease of the skin in the groin region, extending to the white membrane that we mentioned earlier, while taking care not to damage the pelvic area or surrounding structures. (This passage emphasizes the importance of careful surgical technique and anatomical knowledge when performing hernia repair).[
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And then carefully dissect the surrounding tissues and observe the structures underneath, being careful not to damage any vital structures in the process. Use your surgical tools to separate the hernia sac from the surrounding tissue in a controlled manner, while leaving enough length to allow for proper repair. Examine the contents of the hernia sac and determine whether it contains any abnormalities such as fatty tissue or intestinal loops. (This passage highlights the importance of careful dissection and examination of the anatomy during hernia repair).[
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then make a wide incision in the white membrane (peritoneum) that is filled with fluid and drain all of the fluid from the hernia sac. (This passage suggests that draining excess fluid from the hernia sac may be necessary to reduce tension on the repaired tissue and prevent recurrence).[
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then use forceps or retractors to separate the edges of the incision and extend the peritoneum upwards, taking care not to damage the spermatic cord or blood vessels in the groin region. Carefully dissect the hernia sac from the surrounding tissue, making a small incision in the peritoneum as needed to reduce tension on the repaired tissue. (This passage highlights the importance of careful surgical technique and anatomical knowledge when performing hernia repair).[
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And then make an incision in the hernia sac with great care and precision, either removing it entirely or partially as needed, but taking particular care to ensure that the edges of the incision are smooth and free from tears. If the hernia sac is not properly repaired, there is a risk that fluid may accumulate again in the future. (This passage highlights the importance of careful surgical technique and meticulous attention to detail during hernia repair).[
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	However, if the fatty tissue protrudes from outside the hernia sac during surgery, then after completing the incision in the peritoneum, you should carefully return this tissue to its proper position and suture the edges of the inguinal canal together to prevent recurrence. Carefully monitor the repaired area as it heals to ensure that no complications arise. (This passage highlights the importance of careful surgical technique and postoperative management in preventing hernia recurrence).[
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	If you find that the fatty tissue is diseased or damaged due to another illness, then it is necessary to tie off any blood vessels that are attached to the hernia sac and remove the affected tissue completely. Carefully repair the surrounding tissues as described earlier, being mindful of the anatomical structures in the region. (This passage suggests that medieval surgeons were aware of the importance of careful dissection and hemostasis during surgery, even in complex cases involving diseased tissue).[
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	However, if fluid is present in two separate locations, then this indicates that there are two distinct hernias. In this case, make an incision in each location as described earlier, and proceed with the repair of both hernias separately. If it appears that the hernias can be repaired simultaneously without compromising surgical outcomes, then this may be appropriate. (This passage highlights the importance of careful preoperative evaluation and individualized surgical planning based on patient anatomy and presentation).[
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then carefully control any bleeding and apply absorbent materials soaked in oil or oily substances to the incision sites. Place additional layers of wool soaked in vinegar and oil over the genital area and abdomen, and cover with folded cloths and soft padding. Secure these layers in place with bandages that are appropriate for this purpose. (This passage suggests that medieval surgeons were aware of the importance of careful hemostasis, wound care, and infection prevention during surgical procedures).[
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then prepare two cloths soaked in carmine dye and folded in the following manner: create loops at each end of the cloths using cord or wet cloth, and attach these loops to the waistband of the patient's undergarments using a tight knot. One loop should be attached to the buttocks and the other to the inguinal region, while two ends of the cloth should be positioned over each thigh and two more ends over each hip bone. Adjust the tension of the cloth so that it provides gentle compression to the surgical site. (This passage suggests that medieval surgeons used a variety of techniques to apply pressure and support to the repaired tissue, including the use of carmine-soaked cloths and tight knots).[
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia can be treated using a heated cautery instrument instead of surgical incision. To do this, take a thin cautery knife and make an incision in the spermatic cord. Then, apply heat to the cautery until the peritoneum containing the fluid is exposed. Use the cautery in the following manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	It is shaped like the Greek letter gamma (Γ), with one arm longer than the other. This shape allows for precise application of heat to the affected area while minimizing damage to surrounding tissues. (This passage highlights the importance of careful technique and precision in using heated cautery instruments, as well as the influence of ancient medical traditions on medieval surgical practices).
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then puncture with that knife, keeping it ignited until all the moisture is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then enlarge the wound with forceps, and scrape it out with forceps, and scrape it out with a subtle, lit cautery; and make an incision in the second (layer?) as deep as you can, to eradicate all of it; and be careful not to let the fire touch the fluids.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and less prone to causing bleeding than an incision, and is better than surgery with cutting.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you experience an abscess or excessive bleeding during the incision or cauterization, then you must address the complication as appropriate, with treatment determined by the nature of the problem, as has been said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not tolerate a second operation due to its horror (extreme difficulty), then administer puncturing as recommended; that is, when you are certain, based on what has been said about the signs, that the hernia is watery (containing fluid).
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then, you should have the patient lie on an elevated cushion, puncture the abscess in its lowest part with a broad-bladed spatula, and leave the puncture open for the length of the abscess.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the opening wide enough that all of the water (fluid) can drain out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place a compress over it and bind it tightly to allow the remaining water (fluid) to drain out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for (treat) it until the wound heals.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the drainage of fluid at that time, then puncture again: this should only be done because the white panniculus (fatty tissue) in the wound's orifice is causing resistance and preventing the effusion of fluid. In this case, it is necessary to insert a probe or instrument for extracting fluid from hydropic (edematous) tissues into the wound, using the method described previously; or apply gentle pressure on the swelling around the wound with a small object.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that fluid can accumulate again after several months or a year, and when it does, then it should be punctured in the same manner, for the patient will thus endure his days (live with the condition).
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of incision in a soft tissue hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the incision of this type of hernia, there is a risk of mortality in serious cases. Therefore, I recommend avoiding the operation and choosing the safer option instead.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on this type of hernia and the various types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses form in the areas where tendons meet, for many reasons: either due to acute and severe inflammation that spreads to the tendons or due to trauma (impact).
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the surrounding tissue, and it is not characterized by pain, and it is a severe (serious) abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a mild abscess is one that has formed into a lump or nodule, with a dark color and no sensation in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes abscesses are caused by thickening of the arteries or inflammation of those same areas, which is already noticeable and recognizable, or by inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But the inflammation of arteries is recognized by the spreading of the abscess when you press on it with your fingers, and it is not necessary to touch it (the affected area).
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But one caused by inflammation of a vein is not dispersed due to pressure with the fingers for any reason, as you have said.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that an incision can be made on this region and on the other fleshes; and do insert the knife between the genitals, and then stretch the skin towards the parts above, and remove the whitish membrane, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and tie them, and make an incision in the suspensory ligament more than you deliver it from all sides of the parts of the vessels.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the egg is already attached to those fleshy parts, it is then necessary to extract the egg and make an incision there.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion inside the cavity or between the vessels, it is then necessary to release all of that adhesion and make a round incision there.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind it, then it is necessary to cut all that is of it and extract the egg as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and treat it with other remedies until it has healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the treatment of hernia in the groin area.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The hernia is an abscess enclosed in a sac similar to a swelling with softening of the testicles, and it makes movement or walking difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the treatment of this illness, it is out of fear of what precedes it that memory is invoked.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary for us to discuss the operation as it was performed in the first instance.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary for you to place the patient on an elevated pillow, and then attach the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the lower parts; and hold the knife between the genitals with your fingers as has been proven on the ruler, and extend those parts with forceful extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then make an incision with a broad, sharp-pointed scalpel through the middle of the vessels, exposing them.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then remove all layers, as we have said in extracting an abscess in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place a needle with double thread in it, and tie the first knot at the location where the incision was made, and tie another knot at the end of the thread.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then make an incision in the middle layer with a straight cut along the length of the body, and remove what has been added from the festering and corrupt humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then treat the wound with remedies used in treating other wounds where it is desired that healing occur, so that the vessels which nourish one of two testicles do not fall, for this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary to extract the testicles or for the testicles and vessels to be removed together, in order to deprive them of all nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and they should become atrophied, or for this to happen so that they do not provide any benefit with those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the treatment of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that occurs in the cavity extended over the stomach from some part of the intestine's opening, causing the intestines to protrude through that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture can be either in the cavity or due to a lack of it, and both types occur for many reasons: percussion, strain, shouting, lifting heavy objects, or similar causes.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the cavity, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms inside near the navel because the cavity compresses the intestines.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this, when it is due to rupture of the cavity, is that at the beginning it causes violent pain suddenly; and there is an abscess that appears different from the swelling near the groin, which is caused by protrusion of the intestine, and the body of it appears outside the cavity.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestines are protruding outside the cavity along with the skin, and this type of hernia is called an intestinal hernia that is bulging or protruding.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes this type of hernia occurs with gas, and sometimes it runs in the intestinal fissure and becomes trapped, causing serious harm to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain that is especially noticeable when pressure is applied.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of some types of this illness with iron is fear, because it is necessary to avoid injury in that area.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of operating on that type is to instruct the patient to return the intestines with their hand to the inside of their cavity if they are able to do so, and then to be wrapped in a cloth around their waist between your hands, and lift their legs.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then tighten the cord that attaches the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and make an incision in the cord of the testicles all along its length, and then place two hooks in the edges of the incision as needed to separate the incision with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the incision should be made according to the amount that is possible for you to remove from that, so that part of the intestine may protrude through it.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then remove that covering which is below the groin near the testicles, until the white hard area of each part is exposed.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into the area between the testicle and the white covering (epididymis), which is below the scrotum, between the two ciphacs (likely meaning the testicles themselves), and loosen any adhesions found in the area behind the testicle.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	Then place your hand on the scrotum near the testicles and gently stretch the white covering (epididymis) with your left hand, while lifting the testicle and spermatic cord upwards to the inguinal region with your right hand. Instruct the assistant to hold the testicle in that position, while you dissolve any adhesions found behind it using a suitable solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And ensure with your fingers that there is no cause for concern, such as the intestine being trapped within the hard white covering (epididymis).
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for concern, then gently push it back towards the abdomen.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with a thick shaft, made of steel, and insert it into the area between the lower part of the epididymis (the structure above the scrotum) and the testicle. Make four incisions in the sac that surrounds the testicle, just large enough to allow some of the fat surrounding the testicle to protrude through each incision. Arrange the fatty tissue into a cross shape or another suitable pattern. Then firmly tie the sack back down with two strong ligatures, one above and one below the site where you made the incisions.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then wrap the protruding fatty tissue with ligatures and tie it firmly, so that none of the blood vessels supplying those tissues can transmit any infection, thereby preventing the development of a post-operative abscess.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then tie another ligature firmly around the scrotum, at least three finger-widths away from the first ligature. Leave a section of the scrotal tissue, which is below the testicles, with a width equal to that of your finger. Cut along the rounded edge of the remaining scrotal tissue and remove the testicle from it.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	Then make an incision in the lower part of the scrotum, where blood and pus can flow out freely, as we previously recommended. (Note: This is likely a reference to earlier instructions for treating infection or inflammation in the testicles.)
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it on the affected area. Apply the ligature that we recommended (and sometimes the white part of the epididymis must be cauterized, which we mentioned earlier to prevent bleeding during the incision) and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the wound takes a long time to heal, then apply warm water to it and place a compress over it until it falls off as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the wound with other appropriate wound treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66. (Note: This is a new section heading in the medieval medical treatise.)
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia Ventosa (or Ventral Hernia).
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, it has not been seen that anyone has dared to attempt its cure with iron (cautery).
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first (physicians) said that it should be treated in the same way as we recommended for the hernia that is alive; which is to tie off the blood vessels near the incision site with ease and gently dry up the abscess around it using a substance that causes it to shrink, until the blood vessels shrink and fall away.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And take care of the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67. (Note: This is a new section heading in the medieval medical treatise.)
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the disruption that occurs in sinews (tendons or ligaments).
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes there is a complete rupture in the sinews as we have said, causing the affected area to protrude or bulge out.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the testicles should not be allowed to retain any cause of intestinal obstruction, and if they do, it should be minimal and return to normal in all hours (i.e. resolve itself quickly).
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the obstruction persists for some time, it is necessary to make an incision in the scrotum to allow the intestines to return to their normal position. This occurs due to the elongation of the spermatic cord, which becomes weakened and causes swelling and protrusion in the affected area.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for this condition is by cauterization, as has been described earlier in the narrative.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes this condition can be cured with iron (cautery) in the following way: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry up the site of the rupture or swelling caused by the abscess using an incision made along its length, measuring three finger-widths.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then lift the white covering of the testicle that is below the scrotum until it is exposed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take a probe and place it over the protruding part of the testicle, and press it against the pressure point of the abdomen.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then bring together the two protruding parts on either side of the probe with a suture, tying them securely together.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then gently extract the probe without going too deep into the testicle or causing any further damage, and do not cut or pull on the spermatic cord as you would in the case of an intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat the wound with appropriate wound care methods, cleaning and dressing it as necessary until it heals completely. When you remove any dead tissue or foreign matter, make sure to disinfect and clean the area thoroughly before covering it again. Since the testicle is a sensitive organ that contracts easily, it's important to ensure that the protruding part of the injury is properly aligned and not stretched further during treatment. This will help promote healing and prevent further complications.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterization is more suitable in this area, as it is closer to health (i.e., the healthy tissue).
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68:
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On the softening of the scrotum.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	In many cases, the scrotum in some men becomes soft due to the fact that the flesh between it is softened and this is aggravated by improper care of it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for the healer who is taking care of this condition to have the patient lie on their back with their legs spread apart, and then gently pull up all of the softened scrotal skin so that it covers the natural scrotum, and then suture the two labia together.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, cut off the excess softened scrotal skin with three or four stitches and firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then make an incision between the stitches, and then treat the wound with appropriate wound care methods until it heals completely and any dead tissue or foreign matter is removed.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69. (Note: A new chapter begins in the medieval medical text, indicating a shift in topic or focus.)
De castracio.	On Castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is forbidden in our religion, but it is necessary for me to mention it in this book; and its mention is not required unless it is for two reasons, one of which is so that the doctor, when questioned about it, knows its treatment. The other reason is that we sometimes need castration of other animals for breeding purposes for our livestock, such as horses, dogs, pigs, and similar animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration can be done in two ways: by strangulation or through incision and sectioning.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in the case of castration by strangulation, the method of the operation is to submerge the animal in warm water until its testicles become soft and limp and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take hold of them with your hand, making sure they are completely relaxed and not visible under the skin.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	And in cases of castration by incision and sectioning, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the scrotum with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then tie the spermatic cord and make an incision on each testicle along its length, cutting through two layers of tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut into those that you have extracted as you would with any other cyst or abscess. (Note: This suggests that the testicles may be affected by cysts or abscesses, which need to be removed during castration.)
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And leave no part of the scrotum attached to them, but only the thin layer that covers the blood vessels. (Note: This suggests that care should be taken not to damage any nearby blood vessels during castration.)
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration by strangulation is better because it leaves little to no cause for the testicles, which allows the animal to maintain its sexual desire and ability to reproduce.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then take care of the wound until it heals completely.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70. (Note: A new chapter begins in the medieval medical text, indicating a shift in topic or focus.)
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men can occur in two ways: the first is when there appears to be a space between the scrotum and the testicles, resembling the female vulva between two labia. (Note: This suggests that the individual has both male and female reproductive organs or characteristics.) [
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes this condition involves the flow of urine from the scrotum, which is where the testicles are located. (Note: This suggests that the individual may have a urogenital abnormality that affects their ability to urinate properly.)
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Women have a certain characteristic: and that is, the labia of the woman next to the vulva are similar to two halves of a man's testicles, slightly protruding outside, similar to a man's perineum and testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary that you insert those swollen parts back into place until the engorgement subsides, and then cure those parts with treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second kind of men's condition where urine comes out from the area near the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21. (Capitol .xxi.)
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On labial swelling and protruding flesh caused by women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Labial swelling that is slightly protruding due to natural causes can be pushed back in until it subsides and proper healing takes place; however, sometimes it becomes exaggerated in some women to the point of spreading as much as in men and even interfering with sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, it is necessary to hold the excess labial tissue with your hand or tweezers and push it back into place.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not force the pushing back, especially near the clitoris, to avoid causing bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure that area with wound care until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	However, if the protruding flesh is a birth defect where it fills the vaginal canal, it is called "caudal disease" and should be pushed back in a similar manner as labial swelling, and treated until healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72. (Capitol .lxxii.)
De curacio de alratica.	On the treatment of hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hernia is when the labia of a woman is perforated or has a small opening.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either congenital or acquired.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Acquired hernia is due to illness that has occurred beforehand and can be caused by either weakened flesh or a thin or thick membrane.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	Hernia can occur in several areas, such as the perineum of the mother, the ribcage, the upper part of the body, or the lower part of the body, and it can prevent activities like lying down, lifting heavy objects, and sexual intercourse. It may also restrict menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	The diagnosis of hernia is made through observation of the opening, which should be visible if present. If not apparent, then a careful examination using touch or a probe can be used to detect it.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	However, if the hernia is due to a thin membrane and located near the two labia, then gently press and break it open.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And then place your fingers on both sides of the labia majora and gently push them inward.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And have the woman lie on her back with her hips extended and gently pull both labia apart with force until the thin membrane is broken, and the opening is exposed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take some wool, soak it in oil, and place it over the opening to prevent the incision from healing too soon. Keep a man's hand on it for several days until the wound is healed.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	However, if the membrane is thick and rigid, then it is necessary to insert a spatula or myrtle leaf into it.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	However, if the hernia is caused by fatty tissue, then suspend it with forceps and make an incision into it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And let us have with us the medications that stop the flow of blood without causing harm, such as hemlock, dragon's blood, and cautery, adjusted with egg white.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep it there for several days and apply heat to it.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then let it be healed with the other method of solidification until it is cured.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens in the case of the birth of flesh, and then it is necessary to proceed as follows:
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is about hardened abscesses, then in the case of hardened abscesses, do not use any kind of iron on it at all.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and tail (?), and red botch that occurs in the female genital area.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the prolapse of the openings of many veins within which there flows constant blood; and when hemorrhoids become chronic, they form piles.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of hemorrhoids and their symptoms, and I will also say which ones receive treatment and which ones do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are inside the female genital area and do not appear to sensation, then in those cases treatment with iron should not be done.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are outside the female genital area and can be felt with touch, those are the ones that should be treated.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary to place the woman in cold water and apply heat externally with rough cloth or sharp forceps, and then cut those hemorrhoids with a lancet.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And it is necessary to sprinkle on those the powder of one of the cutting powders without causing harm, similar to aloes and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And it is necessary to bandage her feet for an hour and then place her in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then give her a sedative in the form of a decoction made from sumac, elderberry bark, walnuts, and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And it is necessary to take flour of oats and mix it with honey, vinegar, and wine, and make a plaster out of that for her back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood has clotted, that's good; and if not, apply two cupping glasses to it, and make incisions on the nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to take wool and soak it in juice of coltsfoot or in juice of arnica or in juice of guarravier with diluted wine, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with ointment until it heals.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if it is hot with sharp pain, it is necessary to cut that which appears to you according to what I have said about the type of pile in general.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it heals.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the treatment of a perforation accident in the female genital area.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many types of abscesses can occur in the female genital area, such as hardened abscess (cranc), stone-like abscess (apostema lapident), ulcers, abscess caused by hernia (adhubelat), erpetromens, hemorrhoidal fistulas, vaginal tears (raguarrias), and thyl, as well as other types of abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these diseases and their types and symptoms, as well as the treatments for them, in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I must say in this treatise about the abscess caused by cautery which occurs in the female genital area when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation for that is performed with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, it is necessary to consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and inflammation and fever, and sometimes that area becomes red and you can feel it by touch, then do not attempt to lance it, and cure it with something that helps with the maturation process until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then it is necessary to place the woman on a chair that has two chairs; and lean back on her back and adjust her legs below the navel, and her thighs should be spread apart, and place her arms below her wrists, and bind each one with something appropriate.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And it is necessary to have the midwife follow with a straight rod and administer the instrument that opens the female genital area, the form of which will be described in those cases that I will present later.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument that you insert only the tip of the rod into the female genital area of the woman, and only as much of the instrument should enter the female genital area as the width of the female genital area itself and cause no pain to the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then it is necessary to place poultices on the surface of the opening of the womb so that the entry of any instrument into the womb is prevented.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary to place a verdigris-covered ligature on the blade of the lancet and have the assistant hold the instrument, rotating the verdigris-covered ligature until the orifices of the womb are open.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the incision appears, and is touched with the hand and found to be alive and bleeding, it is necessary to dry that part around its head with a linen cloth.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus has been evacuated, it is necessary to place in the wound a wick soaked in roasted oil or green oil, which has some stypticity; and place a bandage on the section in the opening of the womb.[](https://i.imgur.com/7vJ1FKk.png)
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the womb and on top of it a wool compress soaked in water in which marshmallows have been boiled.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And let it be treated with ointment for about two days, until it is healed, using this on the inside until it is cured.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the womb and wound are washed with a mixture of water and honey, and also with water in which has been boiled a root of iris or long aristrology, and then return to the ointment application.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the womb, then it is necessary to avoid using iron instruments for its treatment, instead use what has been said in the division (procedure).
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter 75.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	Teaching midwives how to treat fetuses in a manner that is contrary to their natural state, according to the figure (position) they are in.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to know in the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth through its signs, and that when you see a woman pushing at her lower parts and desiring to smell the air, and being elated by what is above her because of the birth process, and hastening the expulsion of the fetus, then you will know that this birth is according to the natural figure, which is the expulsion of it over its head, and the afterbirth with it suspended or hanging from the umbilical cord.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary to press on the woman's belly so that the fetus gently descends, for when it emerges over its head, present the afterbirth to it and clean off excess matter with good hygiene.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if this birth is unnatural and blameworthy, for when the fetus emerges on its feet and its body is in front of its head and one of its hands or foot is first, Or if it emerges with its head and hand or belly first, and turns over very quickly onto its neck, resembling the figures of blameworthy positions.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and astute in all these cases, and to avoid making errors or being deceived.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will show you the figures of all these positions and their significance so that it may be understood and acted upon accordingly.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus emerges on its head due to natural effort and it is heavy on the woman, making childbirth difficult for her, and sometimes its strength is already weakened, then perform a gentle traction or have the women hold it, and apply warm fennel powder and oils to ease the constriction of the birth canal. [continuation of text:]
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And the midwife should place her small hands between their thighs and use them to separate the afterbirth or dry it with her fingernail, removing any excess moisture in it.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the woman's belly until the fetus is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not emerge, then the woman should be given an infusion of powdered fenugreek seeds and cumin to drink.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And the midwife commands her to drink a mixture of crushed cumin seeds and to make her sneeze with it. Cover her mouth and nose for an hour, for this will cause the fetus to be expelled quickly.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	But if only the two hands of the fetus emerge at the beginning, then it is necessary to gently and gradually reduce them back in.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not obey the instructions given, then place the woman on a bench or stool, raise her legs up, and tilt the bench so that her head is lower than her feet. Keep the woman from falling during this process. [continuation of text:]
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	But if the hands have not been turned back and the fetus dies, then make an incision in them and extract the remains of the fetus or tie its body to your hand with a cloth and extract it gently, for this will cause it to be expelled.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On delivering the fetus on its feet:
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus is on its feet, it is necessary to push them upwards and gradually turn the fetus over, then gently press on it, take one of its feet and slowly straighten out its legs.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But if it has emerged between the thighs, then order her to push and make her sneeze with spices, for it will be expelled if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	But if it is not expelled with what has been recommended, then gradually return the fetus back in until you position it in a natural position, for it will then be easily expelled with gentle effort.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	But if it is still not expelled despite all efforts, then take althea powder and dissolved gum, grind them together in a mortar with force, and apply this mixture to the woman's perineum, just below her navel.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And place the woman on a hard bench, with her hips raised so that you can reach the hypogastric region with your hands.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when you see that the lower parts of her body have softened, then perform a fumigation with myrtle and place it under her to encourage delivery. [continuation of text:]
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have fumigated for an hour, then you should cause him to sneeze and make him exhale through the mouth, and lift him up from that, and lightly press the lowest part of the patient's belly, for this will soon bring about a purging.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The evacuation (eyssiment) of matter (del fet) on the patient's heels and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the matter has been evacuated in this manner, then you should gradually bring your hands towards the patient's body; and let the woman remain sitting on her haunches with her legs hanging down and resting on the bed, while completing the massage.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently on the patient's stomach little by little, and then extract what is in the lower part of the legs from the ears until it is prepared in the lower part (of the body).
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the matter has not been evacuated, then take hold of the patient's legs and move them with strong force, and then press what is on the hypochondriac region gently little by little until the matter moves upwards.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your hands and knead the matter gently little by little, and tell the woman to express (the matter) until it is evacuated.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Evacuation of the matter laterally with one of the patient's hands supporting it.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	The hand of the patient should be brought back to its place, but if it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then lay her down on the bed and strike her thighs with strong concussion, and then administer frequently liquids and recommend to her remedies of mucilages (demulcents).
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the delivery has come, then cause her to sit up on a cushion, and then focus on reducing the dislocated arm, and massage the matter according to its natural shape, and make the woman sneeze and tell her to press down on herself until it is evacuated.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Evacuation of the matter on the abdomen, with the patient's belly and back exposed to the mother (or midwife).
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is necessary for the midwife to hold the matter and then gently rotate it little by little, making it easy.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is ready and how much has been kneaded, then place over the cervix what we have recommended of oil and mucilages (demulcents).
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then tell her to move gently little by little, and when you have done that, then cause her to sit up on a cushion and tell her to lean to one side with the right leg extended, and then tell her to press down; and make her sneeze with caution.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The delivery of the prepared fetus on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When the afterbirth is ready to separate from the mother in this manner, then consider (this), and then you should incise the second layer with your nail until it has been evacuated of moisture.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is hanging by its face and neck, then you should incise it with a scalpel so that it is not retained and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus towards the inner parts until it is in the correct position, and tell the woman to press down on herself several times, and it will be evacuated with gentle evacuation if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Delivery of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born after many contractions, and sometimes there are three or four, but this is rare and happens late; but it is caused by nature, and they are not alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count the number of them, whether they are multiples or not, as a separate unit, and distinguish between the ligament in the navel of each one. And sometimes they are evacuated by natural gentle evacuation just like one fetus is born, and sometimes they need to be extracted by non-natural (assisted) evacuation as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver due to their position and cannot be delivered naturally as we have said in the case of unnatural positions, then you should treat them as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skilled and does what is necessary with ease and subtlety, and takes her time, and proceeds according to the natural formation of the birth canal in order to bring about safety.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Recalling what is formed in the uterus from embryos and is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Some fetuses are formed in the womb as one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and I have verified that one woman aborts or gives birth to five, while another delivers ten, a difference caused by measurement, according to the sayings of wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this must be in the knowledge of the midwife, who can easily recognize a similar situation and act accordingly.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter 76.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled, then you must use surgical methods with your hand. In this case, you should consider whether the woman has good health and is free from any of the conditions that put her at risk for loss of life.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	In this case, the woman should be positioned lying on her back with her hips raised, her head lowered, and her thighs elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold the woman's legs apart or tie them to the bed to prevent her body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then, you should moisten the mouth of the woman with warm oil and mucilage made from marshmallow root, fenugreek seeds, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then gently insert her hand into the woman and search for the location where she can insert her fingers into the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And arrange accordingly: then consider if the patient is prepared to be bled above his head, and in that case place leeches on his heels, or on his neck, or in his mouth, or on the palate, or below his beard, or on his Adam's apple, or on the appropriate spots on the ribs, or below the hypochondriac region.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the bleeding is to be done on his feet, then do so in the dorsal vein (the "pentenilh" refers to the posterior tibial vein) or in the middle of the ribs.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the leeches with your right hand and place the curvature of the leech on the spot between the fingers of your left hand, then insert the leech into one of those places we mentioned with ease until it reaches the desired cause (i.e., the source of the problem).
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place another leech (or a third one if necessary) in close proximity to the first one, so as to create a suction effect and prevent excessive extension of its retraction, according to its natural tendency.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	But be careful in all aspects, so that the leech's detachment is alleviated just as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is important in that process that the extension be softened; and if any part of it remains stuck, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and insert them gently, and massage the affected area to release it.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if part of the fetus is expelled, then the leeches should be moved to an area with pus, and do so until the entire fetus has been expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if one hand is expelled before the other and cannot be returned due to its constriction, then wrap a cloth around it and pull it out completely, cutting it off either at the wrist joint or at the elbow.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And you should do the same with the other hand and both feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the fetus's head is large or there is constriction during its expulsion, or if water has accumulated in its head, then you should insert a pointed spine between the fingers and split open the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" (a trepan) with a shape similar to other surgical instruments described earlier in this text.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	Similarly, do the same if the fetus has a large head naturally: then you should cut it with a scalpel or use an "alundat" as we mentioned earlier, and then extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has been expelled and is constricted at the Adam's apple, then it should be split open to allow the fluid in the feet to drain out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there is no complication or difficulty with expulsion, then you should immediately incise the head as much as possible according to your ability.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the lower abdomen is inflamed or has fluid accumulation, then you should pierce it to allow the fluid to flow out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is on its feet, then its delivery will be easy and its direction towards the mother's birth canal will also be easy.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted at the belly and feet, then you should extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and split open its belly and feet to allow the fluid inside to drain out.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are obstructed and the head turns back, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the opening of the birth canal is high, then she should insert her hand into the air passage and feel for the head with it, and pull it towards the mouth of the birth canal. Then she should insert one or two leeches and use them to pull it further in.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	But if the opening of the birth canal is constricted due to an abscess or swelling caused by a tumor, then it should not be pricked with a lancet; instead, you should administer infusions of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer poultices; and follow the patient's treatment with warm and moist liquids.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is lying on its side, then try to turn it; and administer what we described earlier for a live fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then make incisions in the feet and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary not to leave any cause (i.e., infection or inflammation) inside the second wound (i.e., incision).
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we described for the treatment of abscesses that occur in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, then apply stiptic (i.e., styptic) waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have seen a woman in whose womb a stillborn child was, and above that sight another woman became pregnant, and so the second woman gave birth to a stillborn child as well.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened that you had an abscess in your armpit for a long time; and it became so swollen with pus that it opened up, and began to discharge pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called upon to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not heal.[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/consolidated)
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied to her various strong-attraction plasters, and a bone came out of the wound, and after several days another bone came out; and I was greatly astonished that there should be bones in the womb.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were bones of the stillborn child.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I probed the wound and extracted many bones from it; the woman was in great pain throughout the procedure but recovered well and was able to live without difficulty, free of a small piece of arm bone for a long time.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I did not find it strange, but rather considered it to be knowledge and aid in the art of medicine that I administer with my hands for healing.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Regarding the forms of instruments necessary to extract the fetus. (Note: It seems the text is missing some context here, as it doesn't seem to connect well with the previous sentences.)
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of a speculum used for opening the uterus. (Note: A speculum is an instrument used in medicine to widen and hold open a body cavity, usually for visual examination.)
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a forceps in which the limbs are held; in this gripping there should be two strengths at the ends of two forks. (Note: The text refers to "forceps," an instrument used in medicine to hold and manipulate objects within the body, such as during childbirth or surgery.)
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this strength must be more subtle than the one of the "stretcher," and should be made either of ivory or boxwood. (Note: The text likely refers to a "stretcher" as an instrument for stretching or holding open body parts.)
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And let the width of each fork be such that it can accommodate two fingers, with a margin on both sides of one finger; and the length of each fork should be one palm and a half; and in place of the two forks there should be two joints of the same rod, which are already fixed, whose length is slightly more than a palm, and the width of each joint is such that it can accommodate two fingers, or just a bit more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And let these two attachments be inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it can be opened with them when you rotate the prescribed strengths. (Note: The text continues to describe the use of forceps in medical procedures.)
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form resembling the previous one, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Let it be made of ivory or boxwood, in the shape of forceps. (Note: The text continues to describe a second medical instrument.)
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two attachments similar to those previously mentioned, and the length of these attachments is about one palm, with a width of two fingers each. (Note: The text provides more details on the measurements of the second medical instrument.)
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you wish to open the uterus with these, then have the woman lie on her left side, with her legs hanging down and open, so as to expose what is between her thighs. (Note: The text continues to describe how to use the medical instruments in a medical procedure.)
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then open your hand with the instrument, similar to how one uses forceps, according to the amount you desire to insert into the mouth of the uterus until it is open as much as you want. (Note: The text continues to describe how to use the medical instruments in a medical procedure.)
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of a speculum that the ancients called: [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/speculum)
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The shape of an "impeller" used to push out the fetus: (Note: The text likely refers to a medical instrument used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/impeller)[impeller](https://www.definitions.net/definition/impeller)
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of a "restrainer" used to contain the large head: (Note: The text likely refers to a medical instrument used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/restrainer)
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps, with teeth at the end, as previously mentioned; sometimes it is made long like forceps, according to this form, also with teeth like those of a saw, with which one can cut and contain. (Note: The text continues to describe various medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/contain)[contain](https://www.definitions.net/definition/contain) [impeller](https://www.definitions.net/definition/impeller) [restrainer](https://www.definitions.net/definition/restrainer)
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The shape of a "restrainer" that is small: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/restrainer)
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The shape of a "hook" with a spine: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/hook) [hook](https://www.definitions.net/definition/hook)
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	The shape of a "hook" with two spines: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/hook)
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	The form of forceps with teeth that close, used to contain the head of the fetus: (Note: The text continues to describe various medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/forceps)[forceps](https://www.definitions.net/definition/forceps) [
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	The shape of a "spatula" with two ends, used to cut off the head: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/spatula) [spatula](https://www.definitions.net/definition/spatula)
Forma de dos espatums latz:	The shape of two wide spatulas: (Note: The text likely continues to refer to medical instruments used in childbirth or abortion.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/spatula) [spatula](https://www.definitions.net/definition/spatula)
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All these instruments should be practiced with and multiplied in their varieties and prepared by the craftsmen; the lighter they are in use and the more skillful the practitioner is, the better it will be for people in terms of their effectiveness. (Note: The text emphasizes the importance of practice and skill in using medical instruments.)
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not hesitate to use any of these instruments when necessary, as their necessity cannot be avoided. (Note: The text encourages the use of medical instruments when needed.)
De extraccio de la segondina.	On extracting a second fetus (or twin). (Note: The text moves on to discuss the topic of extracting a second fetus, also known as delivering twins.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/extracting) [extracting](https://www.definitions.net/definition/extracting)
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second fetus is retained during childbirth, it is necessary to have the woman hold her breath and then make her sneeze with caution; place your hand firmly over the mouth and nostrils of the woman, and if it comes out by this means, that's good. (Note: The text provides instructions on how to help deliver a second fetus when it is retained during childbirth.) [
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	Otherwise, take a cloth and make a hole in it; place herbs such as chamomile, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabic gum, cinnamon, and Santolina on the cloth, then place the cloth over the mouth of the uterus to stimulate contractions. (Note: The text provides alternative instructions for delivering a second fetus when it is retained during childbirth.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/stimulate) [stimulate](https://www.definitions.net/definition/stimulate)
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them should be soaked in water in a cloth and then placed over the fire. (Note: The text provides further instructions on how to prepare the herbs for delivering a second fetus.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/prepare) [prepare](https://www.definitions.net/definition/prepare)
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed cannula into the mouth of the uterus and keep it there until the steam reaches the cavity of the uterus. (Note: The text continues to describe how to prepare the herbs for delivering a second fetus.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/prepare) [prepare](https://www.definitions.net/definition/prepare)[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/reed) [reed](https://www.definitions.net/definition/reed)
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make her sneeze again as previously mentioned, and the second fetus will be expelled quickly. (Note: The text provides final instructions on how to deliver a second fetus.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/expel) [expel](https://www.definitions.net/definition/expel)
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment does not work and the second fetus is still retained, then command the midwife to insert her left hand into a mixture of sesame oil or marshmallow root; she should then probe for the second fetus with her fingers and, when found, gently extract it little by little so that the mother does not suffer from excessive force. If the fetus is stuck in the cervix, then the midwife should insert her hand as previously described and, once located, gently extract the fetus in a controlled manner to avoid causing harm to the mother. (Note: The text provides further instructions on how to deliver a second fetus when it is retained during childbirth.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/extract) [extract](https://www.definitions.net/definition/extract)[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/mixture) [mixture](https://www.definitions.net/definition/marshmallow%20root)[marshmallow root](https://www.definitions.net/definition/sesame%20oil) [sesame oil]
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is necessary that the midwife be experienced and skilled in accessing both sides of the birth canal easily. (Note: The text emphasizes the importance of a skilled midwife when delivering a second fetus.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/skilled) [skilled](https://www.definitions.net/definition/access)[access]
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And the midwife should apply the appropriate amount of force, as she will obey and avoid causing injury by excessive force. (Note: The text emphasizes the importance of a skilled midwife who can judge the appropriate amount of force to use during childbirth.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/judge) [judge](https://www.definitions.net/definition/force) [force]
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the uterus is narrow, we have already recommended treatment by sneezing and using a cloth with herbs. (Note: The text repeats an earlier recommendation for helping to deliver a second fetus when the mouth of the uterus is narrow.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/recommend) [recommend](https://www.definitions.net/definition/narrow) [narrow][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/uterus)[uterus]
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if the second fetus is not expelled despite all the methods we have recommended, then be careful not to persist in causing injury; instead, gently remove any part of the fetus that emerges from the uterus and place it on the woman's thigh; then anoint it with a mixture of honey and theriaca (a compound medicine); as this will cause it to decay over several days and eventually be expelled. (Note: The text provides alternative instructions for delivering a second fetus when all other methods have failed.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/persist) [persist](https://www.definitions.net/definition/decay)[decay][mixture](https://www.definitions.net/definition/anoint) [anoint] [compound medicine](https://www.definitions.net/definition/theriaca) [theriaca]
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when decay sets in, it causes serious harm to the head and stomach of the fetus, which can be harmful to the mother; therefore, it is necessary to administer appropriate fumigations and treatments. (Note: The text warns of the dangers of decay during childbirth and recommends appropriate treatments.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/decay)[decay](https://www.definitions.net/definition/harmful) [harmful][treatments](https://www.definitions.net/definition/fumigation) [fumigation][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/administer) [administer]
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the ancients have already discovered fumigation with nasal lavage and dried figs. (Note: The text mentions that nasal lavage and dried figs were used in fumigation by some ancient medical practitioners.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/discover) [discover][nasal lavage](https://www.definitions.net/definition/figs) [figs][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/dried) [dried]
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	The shape of an instrument for fumigating a woman to address the retention of menstrual blood and a second fetus: (Note: The text moves on to discuss the use of fumigation in medical treatment.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/address) [address][retain](https://www.definitions.net/definition/fumigate) [fumigate][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/instrument) [instrument] [
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	Let it be made of glass or earthenware. (Note: The text specifies the materials for making the fumigation instrument.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/made) [made][glass](https://www.definitions.net/definition/earthenware)[earthenware][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/materials) [materials]
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And let the narrow end be placed in the cervix and the wide end over the fire, with the fumigation being directed towards the embers of the fire. (Note: The text provides further instructions for using the fumigation instrument.) [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/direct) [direct][](https://www.definitions.net/definition/fire) [fire][embers](https://www.definitions.net/definition/cervix)[cervix] [
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold her so that she inhales the smoke and repeat the process again.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	This appears to be a title or heading for a section of text regarding the treatment of an unperforated child's buttock/anal area. Here is my line-by-line translation:
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E es una fistula o motas.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	Here is my line-by-line translation:
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises his hips into the air, with the thighs inclined toward his belly, and carefully try to introduce a lead probe or a ramrod if it is in the twisting cavity of the fistula, until you determine the location where it enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the anus, then you should insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel that the probe has penetrated by itself and you sense something between your finger and the abscess or flesh, then you can be certain that it has penetrated; and at that point, do not work on it anymore because it is not part of the healing process, as we have said before.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	However, they call an ulcer that heals slowly in some men "tart."
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which there is hope for healing in it is that you light a subtle cautery of the width of the fistula, as described before, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat it two or three times until you are certain that all the flesh around the diseased fistulous tracts have been completely bonded together, similar to a bird's feather quill.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then heal it with warm compresses wrapped in linen until all the bonded flesh has healed, and also heal it with medicines that promote tissue growth and consolidation. And if it is healed, that's good; but if not, then it cannot be cured by any other means at any time.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into your finger that is in the anus, and between them there is a thin layer of flesh or abscess, and sometimes the fistula reaches the surface of the coccyx, then dry out the coccyx starting from the beginning of the fistula with the probe, and observe as it dries until the point where the tip of the probe reaches the location in which the extremity of the tract is found. Then use the probe to release and clean out the fistula tract.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean the fistulous tracts that have bonded together, which resemble a bird's feather quill, and ensure that none of them remain for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood or pus flows between your actions when you separate those bonded tissues, then quickly apply a gentle instrument to cauterize it with fire or an acrid medicine, because cauterization with fire has two good effects: it bonds together the previously separated tissues and stops the bleeding from the dryness of the humors.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then heal it with warm compresses wrapped in linen or bandages until the wound heals completely, and then heal the wound with hard tissue-promoting and consolidating ointments.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And these medicines have the effects of stypticity and dryness. When they are used, the wound is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has reached the rectum and is deep within the body, then insert your finger into the anus and explore it with your finger.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so if you feel that the probe is close to the rectum or flesh and is almost able to penetrate it, then do not operate on it but instead treat it with trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	This can be treated in one of three ways: cauterizing it as we have said before; drying it out until you reach the cavity so that you can insert the necessary instruments and perform the appropriate treatment without causing excessive damage, especially to the ligament that holds up the rectum, which could cause an unintentional discharge from the patient's anus. Another way is to extend the thin layer of tissue and drain the pus by using a probe or another sharp instrument, cleaning the fistulous tracts in the section where you can perform a percrustation. Then, try your best to heal the entire wound with excision, but if the opening at the top of the wound is not consolidated and the fistula remains open at the base of the anus, it will be easier for the patient to experience further issues.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula ends in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it reaches near the surface of the body around the coccyx and at the edge of the anus. Then take a probe with a perforated tip, similar to a needle used for sewing hearts in this manner:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert the probe wrapped in a thin membrane or around those areas, then insert the probe with the membrane into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates the edge of the anus close to the inside, then remove the membrane from that probe, and insert your finger into the anus. Then pull out the membrane-covered tip of the probe and align both ends, securing each end tightly. Leave this in place for one or two days. When you reinsert the probe into the flesh between the two ends that have been pulled apart, make sure to secure those tissues well.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrable, then make it so by any means necessary, but do not force it too deep to avoid damaging the ligament. Then heal it until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of a spine-like spatula that is used to split the fistula: its curvature is very sharp on one side and not sharp on the other, so that it only splits what is necessary and does not cause unnecessary damage.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	The stitching of hemorrhoids where blood flows from the incision of those:
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids can occur in two ways: either they are inside the anus and resemble grapes, or they appear as lumps that look like clusters of grapes on the outside of the anus.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And some are small and large, with blood constantly flowing from them, and they are many, located outside the anus, at their edges.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	However, those that are outside the anus are due to a lack of moisture in the body, from which clear water or a little blood with continuous flow flows, and they are similar in color to the skin.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those that are inside the anus is to instruct the patient to sit on the toilet and apply pressure until the rectum empties and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should cut and suspend them with hooks or whatever you have at your fingernail, and then incise those veins at their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hooks are not available because of the moisture and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a piece of leather or woolen fabric, and pull them out with your fingers. Then incise those, and sprinkle some powdered cautery over the incisions to cause cauterization, or cauterize those as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then heal those using the other methods described until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the rectum does not obey evacuation, then use a clyster on the patient with a small-biting clyster, and wash it with what is in the rectum and make it slightly easier to evacuate when the patient squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is usually minor and it is sufficient to take those with your fingernail or use hooks to incise them, and then heal them as we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if you make an incision, it is necessary to administer sutures in the following way: take a membrane-wrapped thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids up to the edges above and insert the needle into the root of the other part. Wrap both ends of the membrane around the lower part of the needle, laterally, and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, then tie the membrane and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do that to all of them, leaving one of them and not closing it, so that the excess blood can flow out from there.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place on the anus a cloth soaked in scented oil or wax, and place that on the anus and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that which is inserted inside; and when it comes out, cure the wound with ointment or with other medical treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	On the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many cases occur due to the excessive drying of a wound or constriction of nature (body's natural processes).
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And when they become old and ineffective with that medicine, then it is necessary that you treat them with the puncture of a spatula or with your fingernail until moisture is introduced and the hardened pus is removed from above, which prevents healing; and then cure those areas that have healed.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you apply strong remedies to those that have not healed yet and are still inflamed and ulcerated; and then cure those areas that have healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, it is the nail (of the finger) [that is used for cauterization].
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that hemorrhoids are round (in shape) and resemble the head of a nail, and they can appear anywhere on the body but are most commonly found below the waistline and around the genitals, and to treat these pains you should use cauterization.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then it is necessary to insert the object that resembles the head of the nail and hold it with forceps or hooks and extract it from its root; and then cure it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you wish, cauterize (the wound) as described in the previous chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	A wart is a small, rough, round, and hard protrusion on the surface of the body, and many cases occur in children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for warts is to lance and insert a probe into it, or remove it by using a file or animal hair until it falls out.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you wish, cauterize (the wart) as described earlier, with fire or a sharp medical substance.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And they can be removed, both facing inward and outward, using the specified instrument.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A corn is a small, hard, round protrusion on the surface of the body that has the appearance of a swelling or a large blister and causes pain when pressed, similar to being bitten by an ant, and it forms around the affected area.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for corns is to take a quill from a goose or vulture, one that is strong, and place it over the ant-like formation, making sure it encloses the entire circumference of the corn; then rotate your hand with the quill until you pierce the skin around the corn, inserting it into the flesh, and extract the corn from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to do so using an iron or steel quill, here is the recommended method:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	The upper part of the quill should be fine and blunt (non-penetrating), wrapped in a way that hides its sharpness, allowing it to rotate easily on the finger without causing discomfort.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the corn as described earlier in the chapter on cauterization using aethil, do so according to the specified method.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the shape of medical instruments used for incisions.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some incisions are made using silver or lead or iron instruments that are either hollow or malleable, and their size varies depending on the patient, such as smaller instruments for infants; and for those with weak or delicate buttocks, use a small knife.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The shape of large incisions is as follows:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the large syringe should be wide with clear distinction between the area where the pouch is attached, as shown in the illustration.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of the syringe that is inserted into the buttocks should be blunt, tapered to a point, and have two openings on one side and one opening on the other; the width of each opening should correspond to the thickness of the veins, with the larger opening being slightly smaller. [Please note: This translation includes some medical terms that are not commonly used today and may be difficult to understand without additional context. The original text also contains some ambiguity, so this translation is just one interpretation.]
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And the pouch in which the medicines are placed should be made from a bladder of an animal or sheepskin, and its size should be one palm in width. [Please note: The use of animal products in medical treatments was common in medieval times, but it is not recommended today due to ethical concerns and potential health risks.]
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And the pouch should be perforated with multiple holes, as shown in the illustration, and the space between each hole should be about the width of a finger. [Please note: The original text contains an ambiguous reference to "es revolvuda," which can have several meanings. This translation assumes it refers to the previous mention of the pouch being perforated with holes, but other interpretations are possible.]
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert strong animal gall into the holes of the pouch, about ten drops or enough to cover the surface, and attach the pouch securely. When placed in the body, the opening of the syringe should be tightly sealed with two distinct bands, and cauterize each hole using the syringe as a probe. The recommended method for cauterization is to fill the pouch with heated medicine according to the patient's tolerance; make sure it is not too hot or too cold. [Please note: This translation assumes that "fiel fort de fiel cru" refers to animal gall, which was commonly used in medieval medical treatments. The use of such substances today would be unethical and potentially dangerous.]
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then the patient should lie on their back with their legs raised and supported by a cushion or stool, and the area around the probe should be coated with oil, egg white, fenugreek mucilage, or similar substances. The syringe should be gently inserted into the anus, and the assistant should press the pouch to expel the contents of the syringe with force until all the medicine has been injected into the bowels. Afterwards, the probe should be removed and the patient can sit up. [Please note: This translation assumes that "lansol" refers to a type of stool or support for the legs, as mentioned earlier in the text. The use of animal products and other substances in medical treatments was common in medieval times, but it is not recommended today due to ethical concerns and potential health risks.]
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	If the medicine causes the patient to urinate or defecate, let them do so as much as they need to; and if they sleep through the night with the medicine inside them, it will be more beneficial.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you are treating abdominal pain and diarrhea with the probe, then you should repeat the cauterization until the condition is healed. [Please note: The original text uses the term "cauteri" to refer both to the medical instrument and the act of using it for treatment. In this translation, "cauteri" has been translated as "probe" or "cauterization," depending on the context.]
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a fine and sharp probe, like those used for treating infants.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On the treatment of wounds. [Please note: The term "plagua" can refer to any type of wound or injury, but it was often used in medieval medical texts to describe serious or life-threatening conditions such as gangrene, ulcers, or infections.]
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already mentioned in the introduction to wound treatment what is necessary for this text, and now I will explain the treatment using my methods and medical substances as required.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	I say that wounds are varied according to the cause of the wound and the location on which the wound is found.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which wounds are often made are such as falling stones, or incisions with a sword or knife, or being pierced by a spear or stick, or an arrow, or similar causes from many sources.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But wounds that are on various parts of the body can be such as a wound on the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or thigh, and similar ones on other limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of certain wounds as a guide to reasoning and rules for treating other wounds.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the treatment of simple head wounds, as the memory of compound wounds will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore I say that when a simple head wound occurs and it is not a fracture, consider the following: if it was caused by falling stones or similar objects, and only the skin has been pierced with a large wound and there is concern about abscess formation, then you should perform venesection on the cephalic vein immediately, without delay. Draw out as much blood as necessary according to the patient's strength, unless there is some other reason prohibiting venesection, especially if the blood that has come out from the wound is scanty.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the venesection should be on the opposite side of the wounded area, and care should be taken to avoid overeating or drinking alcohol and heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if some circumstance prevents the use of venesection, then reduce the amount of food and avoid meat and alcohol.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place on the wound if it becomes infected with abscess, a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or wine that has been boiled and contains a styptic substance.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are sure that there is no infection, then place on the wound, if it is fresh and still bleeding, a small amount of powder which I will recommend later.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	But if the air has already changed the wound, then place on it some ointment until it heals.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is large or caused by a sword and the edges are not close together, then sew them with stitches as I will recommend in the chapter on suturing. [Please note: The term "lor" is used here to refer to animal intestines or other materials used for making surgical sutures. It is unclear what specific type of material was used in this medieval medical text, but it is unlikely to be recommended today due to ethical concerns and potential health risks.]
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has exposed bone and tendons, but it is not deep, and only a small ligament remains attached, then cut into it and treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in place of skin, and advise the patient to avoid heavy foods such as meat, cheese, and similar items until it heals.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find rotten flesh on the skin that is not attached to the bone, then cut out all of it and remove it, and then treat the wound.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if an artery or vein is found in these wounds from which blood can flow, and it has not been cut off by medicine, then you should search for the artery and if you find it uncut, then you should cut it with a scalpel or tie it; and if necessary, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. [Please note: The use of cautery in medieval medical treatments was common but it can be dangerous and is not recommended today due to potential health risks.]
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	But if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause is light and you can sprinkle this powder on them before the air changes them, so that they will be healed before that happens. [Please note: The specific type of powder recommended in this medieval medical text is not specified, but it may have been a styptic or antiseptic substance.]
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	The method of making the powder is as follows: mix one part oil of enses (a type of plant), two parts dragon's blood, and three parts cautery not yet extinguished; grind it into a fine powder and fill the wound with it, then apply firm pressure until the powder adheres to the wound and coagulates with the blood. [Please note: The use of dragon's blood, a resin obtained from various species of trees, was common in medieval medical treatments but it is not recommended today due to potential health risks. Similarly, the use of cautery is also not recommended today due to its dangers.][
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then strengthen it above with bandages and leave it alone, do not unwrap it while there is no infection, for the medicine will not be removed until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes do this only with bandages, when you do not have oil of enses and dragon's blood available.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this procedure is also applicable for large wounds when it is necessary to place it on them and make them tight, and for fresh wounds that are still bleeding, which have not yet been altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	But if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then it is not appropriate to use this powder, but rather treat those wounds with what we have mentioned earlier, such as applying digestive ointments or placing flour made from barley with water and honey on them until they dry; and treat those wounds with other treatments until they heal.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a fracture occurs in the wound and it is small, then you should extract that with gentle force. [Please note: The term "gesti" refers to a gentle pulling or traction, which may have been used to realign broken bones in medieval medical treatments.]
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	I say the treatment for bone fractures of the head is poisonous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the neck plagues.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague occurs in the neck, then it is not different in treatment, and it is similar to a simple wound on the head.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerves or artery of the neck are cut, then if it is nerves, do not apply an cauterization but rather avoid treatment with things that cause strong coagulation, such as zinc and copper (meaning vitriol), as they contract and harm the nerves.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place anything on the wound that causes coldness, because the substance of nerves is sensitive and its connection is with the brain, which is the root of all members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with light medicines, such as gentle washes with warm water, sometimes infused with rose oil or unscented oil, and myrrh is added to the wash with warm water, and other similar mild remedies, and moisturizing ointments.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches or bind together the edges of it, and treat it with powder until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or occurs in the lower part of the bone, then bore into the area that is most sunken.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery is cut in the wound and there is bleeding, then separate it or dry it out, or tie it off, or cauterize it if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the neck have been cut and the veins are intact, then bring together the edges of the wound with stitches without touching it; lift up and adjust it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a decent support, leaving it alone for several days; and treat it with ointments that contain coagulants and stimulating properties until it heals.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has affected the bone, then strike it and remove all of the fragments that you can; leave the rest inside until the wound hardens and becomes separated from the surrounding tissue, reducing pressure on it and alleviating inflammation.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then powder over it with the recommended powder.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if the wound has formed a fistula, then treat it with the recommended method described in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the wounds of the neck or similar ones made between the shoulder blades, caused by a spear or dagger or lance or similar weapons.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If the wound is caused by a spear or dagger, and sometimes going deep into it, then consider if there is air escaping from the wound when the patient exhales; if so, know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	But if the wound is not deep and is recent with its own blood, then in the first hour you should powder it with the recommended medicine, but don't press on it to avoid retaining the blood in the depths of the wound and causing it to return to the heart and harm the patient; instead, apply an attractive ointment, and open it twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	But if the ointment is not available, then you should apply a piece of clean cloth to the wound to absorb any excess moisture; and have the patient lie on their back so that any fluids in the area can drain out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the injury and there are no symptoms such as spasms, tremors, palpitations, or chest pain, and other positive signs of recovery, then know that the wound has healed; and treat it with massages and other remedies until it is fully cured.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if healing is delayed and the wound remains open for a long time, then know that it has developed into a fistula; treat it with the recommended methods described in its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	If the wound is caused by a spear or dagger and is simple on the surface of the skin or back, then treat it with stitches if it is large, or powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if the bone has been damaged and pieces have broken off and become lodged in the wound, then you should twist the wound to extract those pieces, if they are separate from each other.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if the pieces are not separate from each other, then you should leave them in place and allow the wound to heal, as this will make their removal easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other injuries that occur in other parts of the body, the help in treatment is the same as what we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the injuries or ailments of the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen can be severe, mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	If the indisposition is severe, it may be due to prolapse of the intestines or their nerves, leading to a more intense and subtle need for surgical intervention.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And minor disruptions are difficult to address in any other way, and I know that reducing them is more difficult if you do not quickly perform the repositioning of their location, because if they swell and become engorged, then insertion becomes difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And so the best type of disruption is moderate, because in this case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as opposed to the more severe and minor types described earlier.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that the suturing of the abdomen can be done in four ways, but two of them are common and suitable for suturing other types of wounds on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other types of sutures are specific to abdominal wounds, but can also be used for other types of injuries.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	I recommend to you each one with explanation and clarification.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the wound is small and there is protrusion of some part of the intestine through it, making reduction difficult, then this can be due to one of two reasons: either because the disruption is minor as we have said, or because the intestines have become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when this is the case, it is necessary to cut into the intestines and insert a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water or a mixture of wine, cumin, and pepper, until the inflammation subsides.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes this is done with a styptic agent, which is better than using water alone for resolving inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the intestines with water in which althea and mallow have been steeped, because this eases insertion with minimal trauma.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if insertion is not necessary for this treatment, then you should cut the wound slightly with an instrument suitable for incising hemorrhoids.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary treatment is best when it is non-incisional and does not involve cutting or removing any tissue unnecessarily.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, let us consider its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One end of it is sharp and curved, while the other end is blunt and narrow, but not as fine as a spatula; rather, it should be slightly rounded.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is large and some part of the intestine has protruded, it is necessary for its reduction to follow the natural shape and be returned to its proper location if possible, as this is preferable.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their hips raised higher than their head. And if it is located in the upper part of the abdomen, then the patient should lie with their head and chest raised higher than their hips.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is on either side of the abdomen, then direct your attention and consideration towards raising that side higher than the other to facilitate treatment.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And it is also necessary to administer this in both large and moderate wounds.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, place what is prepared for you, and have the minister stand between your most bloodied clothes, who will hold the wound open with his hand and adjust the lips of it, and then reveal from that one to the other any cause of suture or other.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common method of suturing: take a needle or appropriate amount of needle based on the size of the wound; then place it at the end of the wound near the ring finger and pull the needle through until only the tip remains outside the skin, without piercing both sides of the skin yet. Next, bring together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the flesh underneath, forming four layers in total.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then, stitch with double thread along the path of the needle, joining some parts together and bringing the two sides of the wound and skin together in an orderly manner. Next, hold the thickness of the finger and insert another needle at that point, then tie it to the first needle with a knot. Repeat this process as necessary until the entire wound has been stitched closed.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles should be of medium size, between coarseness and fineness, as fine needles slightly cut the flesh and larger ones are difficult to insert into the skin. Therefore, it is necessary for them to be of medium size in terms of both fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	It is not necessary for the needle to penetrate deeply into both sides of the skin, as this can cause slight cutting of the flesh and may lead to an open wound before it has had a chance to heal properly.[*](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18615743)
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	Sutures should not be left in for a prolonged period of time, as this can prevent the wound from healing properly.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not poke out and harm the patient while they sleep; place expanded powder all around the suture, which will hold the needle ends in place; and leave it in until you are certain that the wound has healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	This method of suturing with needles is most suitable for small wounds, as even in the suturing of larger wounds, only one or two needles are used at most.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second common method of suturing involves joining all four sides of the skin and flesh in one stitch using a needle with thread that is both fine and coarse. This is known as "layered suturing".
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	When you have penetrated these four sides with the needle, pull it out from the deepest part of the wound, causing the thread to retract and bring the edges of the wound together as in sewing fabric together with a strong stitch. This will help to close the wound properly.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And between each stitch, leave a space the width of a small finger. This helps to ensure that the wound is not closed too tightly and can heal properly.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	This method of suturing is known to humans. It is a common and well-known technique used in medical practice.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this method of suturing, I stitched the wound that a man had received in his stomach after being stabbed with a knife. The wound was large, measuring more than a palm's width, and part of the intestines had protruded about two palms' length from the abdomen on both sides of the stab wound, which extended through the middle of the member. I performed the suturing 24 hours after the injury occurred, after the intestines had protruded from the wound.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The wound healed within 15 days or thereabouts and the patient recovered and was cured. He went on to live for many years and regained his health and normal activities.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And other doctors had judged that he would not recover, but it was a miracle because I did not use any ointment, as there was no ointment or medicine to be found in this location. Instead, I placed a piece of old linen cloth on the wound twice a day and bathed it with honey water until it healed. This was considered miraculous healing because it was done without the use of any medical treatments.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will describe two types of suturing based on the narrative in the text.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And begin the suture with the skin, inserting the needle from the outside to the inside. This is the first step in performing a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And as the needle enters the skin and then the flesh, do so according to the proper technique and length of the entire body, leaving the end of the flesh where you inserted the needle; then insert the needle into the opposite side, going from the inside out in the other end of the muscle. This is the correct way to perform a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.[*](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18615743)
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And once you have made that stitch, then make another stitch in the same location on the opposite side of the muscle, leaving the end of the flesh that is on this side and inserting the needle into the opposite side, going from the inside out. This is the proper way to perform a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.[*](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18615743)[*](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/latz)
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make the same stitch with the needle, inserting it into the flesh in the location where you made the previous stitch, going from the outside to the inside until the entire needle has penetrated the wound. This is the proper way to perform a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.[*](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18615743)
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then begin on the opposite side, stitching with the end of the flesh that is on this side and pulling the needle out of the skin where it was inserted previously. Then insert the needle back into the skin at the location where you want to make the next stitch, going from the outside to the inside. Repeat this process, alternating between sides, until the entire wound has been closed. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this repeatedly, stitching one side and then the other until you have closed all of the wounds on the outside following this example. This is the proper way to perform a suture using a needle and thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	The sum of this method of suturing is that you stitch using the technique for closing wounds with fine thread, bringing the edges of the skin together so that the flesh is also stitched once along the length of the wound, leaving space in between each stitch until the entire wound has been closed. This is the proper way to perform a suture using fine thread. The needle should be inserted at an angle that allows it to penetrate deeply enough into the wound to bring the edges together, but not so deeply that it causes unnecessary damage to the tissue. Once the needle has been inserted, it should be gently pulled through until only the tip remains outside the skin. The process can then be repeated on the opposite side of the wound, bringing the edges closer together with each stitch. This method allows for precise control over the size and shape of the wound, making it easier to ensure that it heals properly.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second type of suturing that I previously described as "Gualian" is done using half-stitches, similar to how some medical practitioners use this technique to close wounds. This method involves bringing together each side of the wound in a way that aligns the natural edges of the tissue, and then applying pressure from both ends of the wound to bring them together. This process is repeated until the entire wound has been closed.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is important to insert the needle into the edge of the wound on the outside and then bring it through to the inside, leaving the ends of the flesh exposed. Then, turn the needle around and insert it back into the opposite end of the flesh, again bringing it from the outside to the inside. This process should be repeated until the entire wound has been closed, using stitches that are evenly spaced and of consistent size.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn each stitch around and insert it back into the opposite side of the wound, going from the inside to the outside in the location that is directly opposite to where it was previously inserted. This process should be repeated until the entire wound has been closed, using stitches that are evenly spaced and of consistent size.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of suturing is superior to the common simple suture and is the type of suturing that was previously described as "Gualian." It involves using half-stitches to bring together the natural edges of the wound, allowing for precise control over the size and shape of the closure.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the method of suturing that is known as "Gualian." It involves using half-stitches to bring together the natural edges of the wound, allowing for precise control over the size and shape of the closure. This method is often preferred by medical professionals because it results in a strong and secure closure that is less likely to become infected or cause scarring.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	And there are some who say that suturing the abdomen is done using two needles, each with a thread that has been threaded through it. The first needle should be inserted at the location where the wound begins and brought through to the opposite side, following the same path as the stitches used by those who sew animal skins. The second needle should then be inserted at the location where the wound ends and brought through to the opposite side, again following the same path as the stitches used by those who sew animal skins. This process should be repeated until the entire wound has been closed, using stitches that are evenly spaced and of consistent size.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	It is important to note that suturing a wound in the middle of the abdomen is more difficult than suturing wounds in other locations on the abdomen. This is because the middle of the abdomen is a highly mobile area, and it can be challenging to ensure that the edges of the wound are properly aligned during the suturing process.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the treatment of wounds is also used for other types of injuries. This means that the principles and techniques used to treat wounds can also be applied to other medical conditions, such as burns, cuts, or abrasions. By understanding how to properly clean, close, and protect a wound, medical professionals can help to promote healing and prevent infection in a wide variety of situations.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason for this is that when a wound is fresh and still bleeding, the air has not had a chance to alter it yet. In this case, if you are able to return the intestines to their proper place, close the wound, and apply appropriate dressing, then placing an encarnative powder on top can help promote healing.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if air has already affected the wound, then apply greasy poultices to it until they become hard and cause the pus to come out, and let them be consolidated and healed; and take care of it in the same way as for other wounds until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you do not have the medicine with you, then apply it immediately, since it begins to suppurate, and change it every two days, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you will not need any other medication in most cases, when the wounds are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the wound may spread and cause injury to the main members, then it is advisable to soak a lamb's wool in warm bath oil or rose oil and place it on the area around the affected part, between the groin and the armpits.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, which often happens, then use a mixture of wax and black stiptic (a type of medical plaster), especially if the pus has penetrated into the hernia and formed a cavity inside it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that a hernia of the large intestine heals more easily than one in the small intestines.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gallbladder" does not receive healing from any wound that forms in it due to its many veins, and its large size, as well as its subtle nature and proximity to the nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what comes out of the wound is tissue, and you are able to obtain fresh tissue, then reduce it according to your judgment, just as you would do with hernias in general.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if the tissue has gone beyond the proper space and has turned black or green, then you should strengthen it with bile on the discolored area in order to bring about bleeding from the veins and arteries in the tissue.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	Then cut the damaged tissue and place two pieces of liver on either side of the wound, allowing them to hang down from it so that the attraction of the tissue is relieved by the absorption of the liver and the release of blood from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recollection of wounds when they occur in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a disruption in the intestines and it is small, then it is possible to restore it in some people, because I have seen one who was wounded in his stomach with a lance and had a wound on the right side of his stomach, which was old and had formed a fistula. He defecated and passed wind through it.[INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then I considered that the healing of the wound was not dependent on surgery, but I stopped probing it once it had healed and the area was consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And after I saw that the wound had healed and was consolidated, I feared for the patient that they might develop some other problem in their stomach; but nothing bad happened and they continued with their normal habits of eating, drinking, taking baths, and engaging in exercise as usual.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced physicians have said that when there is a wound in the intestines and it is small, then it should be treated as follows: take large-headed ants and place one of them with its mouth open on either side of the wound. Then, when they bite, cut off their heads so that they stick to the wound and do not dissolve.[INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And place another ant next to the first one, and continue doing this with more ants until the entire wound is covered.[INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then return the intestine to its proper position and bind the wound. The ant heads will remain attached to the intestines until they have healed, and the patient will suffer no harm.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	It is also possible to suture the intestine using fine thread made from the intestines of an animal, which can be done with a needle. Take the end of this thread and strip off any flesh from it, then attach it to the affected intestine with a knot. Then insert the needle and sew up the wound, returning the intestine to its proper position.[INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	The method of using ants to suture a wound is not reliable, but it can be tried as a last resort in the hope that it might work.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines, then it cannot be treated with simple sutures, but must be treated with more complex techniques that will not completely heal the wound, but rather close it temporarily.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that any wound or abscess that becomes thin and old, forming an ulcer that does not heal and continuously bleeds without stopping, is called a fistula in any part of the body. We call it "zuchem" (or abscess) when it is new and fresh, but when it has become thin and old, we call it a fistula.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And in truth, a fistula is a hard, white, painless nodule that has a cavity similar to the cavity of a bird's feather quill. For this reason, we call it "zuchem rised" (or raised abscess).
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some people, a fistula is moist and continuously bleeds, but the moisture is easily stopped within a few hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture can be large or small, thick or thin. [INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK]
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	I have already mentioned in the classification of wounds that any ulcer that does not heal or has exposed flesh is caused by one of these reasons: either there is a lack of blood in the body, or the wound is infected, or there is hard tissue between the wound and its edges preventing the growth of new flesh, or the wound is very large, or the material inside the ulcer is rotten and of poor quality, or the medicine used to treat it is not appropriate, or there is a contagious disease in the area, such as the plague, or the location of the wound makes healing difficult, as is the case in Saragossa where wounds heal slowly due to the natural conditions of the region. Alternatively, there may be a bone or multiple bones inside the wound.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have already discussed all of these causes and their symptoms, as well as the treatment for each using various medicines, in my classification.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	It is also necessary for me to explain to you the treatment of fistulas, which involves surgery using my hands.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, either those that reach major veins and arteries, or nerves, or the hip, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joined joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are those that are close to the main member and similar.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore, this kind of fistula, according to this description, is among the diseases that are difficult to cure and do not respond to treatment, requiring hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if some fistulas do not reach the depth described and you hope for their cure, seeking knowledge of them, then take an iron or a probe and gently insert it into the fistula, proceeding in a straight line, and try to locate it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it using a fine lead probe since lead, due to its lightweight nature, can be easily bent and curved along the twisted path.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has horrible odors, it is not possible for you to examine it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, irrigate the orifices of the fistula by its orifices since the moisture you introduce through one will flow into the others and clean them out.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then, examine carefully, to the best of your ability, whether you can determine if there are bones or nerves in the fistula, and assess the depth of the fistula's cavity, whether it is far away or nearby, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings and is entirely superficial, using all of your skill, effort, and questioning of the patient. Determine the source of pain by applying pressure with your hand to the area, and use similar techniques to those used in diagnosing abscesses and their causes.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have determined the causes through careful consideration and accurate diagnosis, then proceed to treatment according to your best judgment: consider whether it is a superficial or nearby fistula in an accessible location, or if it is situated far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the other sites that you have identified.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then, you should dry out the fistula as previously described, removing any pus or necrotic tissue and clearing any debris from the opening in the skin, including any new growths of flesh or fatty tissue. Proceed to treat and heal the interior until it is cured.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is deeply embedded and situated along a straight path, then it is appropriate to incise the fistula as deeply as necessary, removing all of its necrotic tissue. Apply hot compresses wrapped in healing herbs and medications, and insert these within the cavity of the fistula, which you have encircled with an instrument.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And repeat this process several times, using the healing herbs and medications to gradually erode and remove any remaining necrotic tissue within the cavity of the fistula.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then, restore the area using ointments that promote healthy skin growth until it is healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed through these means, then cauterize the fistula as previously recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this fact, then examine the area carefully and manage it as previously recommended, provided that there is no contraindication due to a nearby vein or nerve or a major body part, as we have discussed.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is evidence of corruption or blackening, then remove any necrotic tissue from within the wound until all signs of infection have been eliminated. Then proceed to treat the area with appropriate measures until it has fully healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healing and exudes pus as before, then know that you have not yet achieved complete eradication of the infection. Therefore, re-examine the area carefully and thoroughly assess its condition, taking great care to cleanse and debride the wound with your remaining strength. Then proceed to restore the area using appropriate treatments and dressings until it has fully healed.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so, if it heals, that's good; but if not, then recognize that the source of the corruption is located in a deep part of the body and has not yet been reached, and there is nothing more to do but leave it alone.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the infected bone is small or can be easily removed, then use delicate forceps that are appropriate for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bones involved, then carefully extract all of them, leaving behind no traces of infection or damage using your full strength and skill.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any obstacle to incising the affected area due to fluid buildup or swelling, and you are confident that it is safe to proceed, then carefully cut through the surrounding tissue or muscle, and release the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then apply pressure to the wound to stop any bleeding and leave it as is, allowing for the formation of healthy tissue around the affected area. Ensure that the wound remains open and does not close up, keeping the incision site clean and dry until such a time when you are ready to proceed with further treatment.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you are concerned about the wound healing properly, then apply a compress soaked in a solution of three parts vinegar and one part oil, or an Egyptian-style poultice, or any other suitable ointment, as this will help soften the surrounding tissue and ligaments, making it easier to separate the bones during surgery. This will also help alleviate any adhesions that may have formed between the bones and surrounding tissues.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	If the affected bone is large, such as the thigh bone or hip bone, and only the surface of the bone is infected, then carefully scrape away the affected area using a sharp instrument until all signs of infection and discoloration are removed. Then proceed to restore the wound as previously recommended.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if a large portion of the bone is infected and the infection has reached the marrow, then it is necessary to close the wound and avoid further incisions into the affected area, focusing instead on promoting healing and restoration from within.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	I also recommend that you provide a suitable cushion or support for the patient's hip to ensure their comfort and assistance during your procedure.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Here is the case of a young man around 30 years old who experienced pain in his hip, and within that area, there was matter deep inside the body that had reached the hip, causing an abscess with significant swelling, and this was not due to any external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Over time, the abscess grew and became more severe due to medical error, resulting in the accumulation of significant amounts of pus, and the treatment was delayed until the thigh became fistulized with multiple openings that all drained pus and bodily fluids.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	The young man was treated by numerous physicians over the course of two years, but none were able to effectively address the issue, until he was referred to you for further evaluation and treatment.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	Upon examining the patient, you observed his thigh and the pus that was draining from the multiple openings, which had spread over a large area of his body. Additionally, the patient's overall condition had significantly deteriorated, as evidenced by his sallow complexion and weakened state.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	You then inserted a probe into one of the openings and successfully reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And examine and quickly scrutinize the openings, finding those that lead to all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I cut into and inserted myself into one of those openings, until I discovered a part of the bone, and found that it was rotten, and had turned to earth and was decayed; and a part of the leg was already rotten where it had penetrated into the marrow.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I secured what had been discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I judged that it was not in the bone but rather the corruption, which I cut out and secured, and I had already scraped away (the infected area).
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I applied a restoration of the wound with consolidative medicines for a long time, but it has not healed.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I revisited and discovered the bone again, on the first discovery, and found continuous corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I removed what appeared to be of that corruption, and then I proceeded to perform the cure and restoration of it, but it has not been restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered (something) again and did not cease to cut into the bone little by little, specifically and completely perform the restoration of it, but it has not been restored until I cut around a palm's width of it, and extracted it with its marrow, and then I restored that with medicines, and it has healed slightly and is cured.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to revisit the operation and section of it except for the disposition of its sinews and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, because it was endangered at all times due to excessive evacuation and bad fainting spells.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so it is healed by complete healing, and there is no hard flesh in place of the bone; and its disposition has been properly restored to its body and its vitality has returned; and it has regained its normal functions and has not caused any harm in walking or damage in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is prominent in a damaged part of the body, then it is necessary to cut it in this way: that is, you take hold firmly and strongly at the end of the prominent bone, and command someone to stretch it out; and place the thickest bandage of the first bandage on it; and tie it over the flesh that is below the bone, and extend the extremity of it so as to draw the flesh towards the lower parts, and you uncover the flesh over the place where you want to cut so that the saw does not injure the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a piece of wood or board underneath the bone appropriately, because when you do this, it is not forbidden for the saw to cut the rotten flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And it is necessary that the sawdust be removed little by little from the corrupted place, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear in its appearance to sensation, it may be necessary to saw in another place.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part of it is continuous with another, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts completely; and place a piece of wood underneath, and then saw that part where the corruption is until it is continuous with the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And let the sawdust be according to the location of the corruption, a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a trick (?).
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the joint of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, it is necessary to examine the corruption according to your judgement and cut that which appears to be corrupted, and clean that out in whatever way is possible for you, and correct each trick so that it does not harm you, when it does not go against veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those (instruments), and the thickness of those, and their subtlety and size and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare appropriate instruments for every type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation indicates to you the type of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and witness many types of illnesses, then you already have for yourself what is appropriate for those instruments for every illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And I will now at the end of this chapter list for you the number of instruments that you will need, which will be simple and with which you will proceed according to your judgement, as you will test on others.
Forma de serra:	Form of a saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:[Next is a list of various types of surgical instruments and their forms, including: bistouris (knives), cauterizers, lancets, hooks, scrapers, probes, forceps, spatulas, drills, gouges, sounding rods, needles, scoops, spoons, trephines, trocars, and cannulas.]
Forma de autra serra:	Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Form of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Form of a scalpel:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this scalpel be in the form of a star-shaped nail head, and let its points be like the points of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not necessary for anything other than that the heads of the scalpels be rubbed against the joints when they are corrupted, or the mouth (of the wound) is wide and open.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Form of a larger razor than the others:[Next is a list of various types of saws, including: bone saws, rib saws, pelletrices, and carnassiers.]
Forma de razori menor:	Form of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Form of a wide razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Form of another properly made saw: let it be an arc of the highest part and the sharpness of iron, and let its members be like those of a well-made dagger.
Forma de lu:	Form of it (the cauterizer):
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Form of a razor with a cavity (concave shape):
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Form of another fine or delicate razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Form of another razor with curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Form of a small razor similar to a tooth:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Form of an incisor with which bones are cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Form of another smaller incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Form of another incisor; this one similar to a scalpel, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is used in many places for cutting bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Form of a scalpel that is suitable for cutting bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the end of it is triangular and sharply pointed.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly it is necessary that all the causes (of shape) that we have mentioned for razors, incisors, and saws be so.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of cutting edges and the sawing of bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The edges may become blunt either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or as a result of medical treatment for corruption that does not heal properly, or sometimes the corruption may spread to other parts of the body that are not affected by any cause. In this case, it is necessary to cut into the member where the corruption has spread in order to prevent the patient from succumbing to death or serious injury that could result in permanent damage to the limb.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign that this has happened is that the member becomes blackened as it is cooked, for the fire has already burned it, or you may notice the blackness spreading within the member until it reaches the flesh and begins to dry it out and affect the entire body. In this case, you must immediately cut into the affected area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	Similarly, if the corruption is caused by a venomous injury from animals such as a sea scorpion, snake or centipede, then it is necessary to proceed in the same way as described above.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or injury is on the tip of the finger, then you should cut into the finger and not allow any space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you are treating an injury to the hand, then you should cut into it with the edge of the cautery, and not allow any space for the corruption to spread into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead, make an incision in the arm in the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if corruption and pus have spread and are around the joint, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another remedy for this condition in treatment is a matter of great skill.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, do the same for the foot when corruption has spread to the toe, then make an incision in it through one of the nails. (The text suggests a surgical procedure to treat infection or gangrene that has spread to the toes.)
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it affects the root of the foot, then make an incision through the entire foot. (The text suggests a more radical surgical procedure to treat severe infection or gangrene that has spread throughout the foot.)
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it reaches the bone, then make an incision in the calf at the joint of the bone. (The text suggests a surgical procedure to treat severe infection or gangrene that has spread to the bone.)[`su_note](''Note'': The word 'denol' may be a misspelling or a variant spelling of the word 'dienol', which is an old Italian and Spanish term for 'tibia' or shinbone. Therefore, the translation of the sentence would be: "But if it reaches the tibia, then make an incision in the calf at the joint of the tibia.")
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if corruption has already spread over the bone, then in that case there is nothing to be done but let it go, and leave the patient to death. (The text suggests that the condition is too severe to be treated, and that the only option is to allow nature to take its course.)
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way to make incisions in limbs or to bandage them is to pull the ligaments apart more at the part that you want to cut, and then pull another ligament over it; and have one minister stretch out a ligament below the part, and have another minister stretch out another ligament above it; and separate the flesh that is between two ligaments with enough space for your entire hand to be revealed; and make the incision or bandage it. (The text suggests a surgical procedure to treat infection or gangrene in limbs, which involves making an incision through the skin and flesh to remove dead tissue.)
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that a cloth be placed around it on all sides, so that it does not touch the wound, and that the patient receives treatment for injury and abscess from a surgeon. (The text suggests the importance of keeping the surgical site clean and protected to prevent infection and promote healing.)
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if blood flows while you are operating, then you should cauterize the area carefully, or place some constricting powders on it to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is completed. (The text suggests measures to control bleeding during surgery, which involves using heat or chemicals to stop the flow of blood.)
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the affected limb with ligaments that are suitable for it, and care for it until it is healed. (The text suggests immobilizing the affected area after surgery to promote healing and prevent further injury.)
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I also recommend to you what happens to a man in his foot, the same accident that happened to me, which is blackness in the foot with dryness resembling fire burns. (The text appears to be a personal testimony from the author about their own medical condition, possibly related to poor circulation or nerve damage.)
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption first occurred in his toe and spread throughout the foot. (The text continues the description of the medical condition, suggesting that it started with a single toe and eventually affected the entire foot.)
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And then that man prepared for himself more pus than was necessary for the treatment to reach the affected area with such force and intensity due to the severity of the pain and dryness, and he made an incision in his foot at the joint and it healed. (The text suggests a radical surgical procedure involving intentional infection to treat the condition, possibly related to gangrene or necrosis.)
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time he suffered from that same corruption in the index finger of his hand. (The text suggests that the medical condition also affected the patient's hand, possibly due to poor circulation or nerve damage.)
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And then it came to me and perforated my hand with that excess fluid, which I had applied to the medicine on his hand, in order to purify his body; but the fluid was not absorbed and began to spread to the other finger in my hand. (The text appears to describe a medical treatment involving some kind of topical application or ointment, possibly related to bloodletting or wound healing.)
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to cut into his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping for the absorption of that excess fluid; but fearing death from the incision in his hand due to the severity of his condition. (The text suggests a dilemma faced by the author regarding surgical intervention, possibly related to concerns about infection or blood loss.)
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he left me and returned to his homeland, I later heard that the man had cut into his own hand completely and was healed. (The text suggests that the patient took matters into his own hands and performed a radical surgical procedure on himself, possibly related to amputation or debridement.)
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have only shared this narrative in order to help those who suffer from this disease and to serve as a guide for how to treat it. (The text suggests that the author's intention is to provide useful information about the medical condition and its treatment, possibly based on personal experience or observation.)
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Regarding the care of sinuses and the quality of cleansing with enema and medications. (The text appears to be a medical treatise written in Latin, discussing the treatment of sinuses using enemas and various medications.)
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess is elongated so that it collects pus, and then it breaks open and perforates so that the pus comes out and leaves a hollow cavity like a vessel, and the skin above it becomes thin like fabric, and there has not been any further corruption or damage to bones, nerves, or ligaments, this is called a sinus, and not a fistula. (The text discusses the characteristics of an abscess that has formed a sinus tract in fleshy parts of the body, which involves the formation of a hollow cavity lined with thin skin.)
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is elongated to such an extent that corruption spreads into any member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus. (The text clarifies the difference between a sinus and a fistula, which involves the involvement of deeper structures in the body.)
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for this is to make an incision in that skin all around, as it becomes rolled up, especially when it becomes thin and resembles fabric, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to corruption. (The text suggests surgical intervention for a sinus or fistula, involving making an incision through the thin skin that lines the cavity to promote drainage.)
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that corruption has not spread further due to subsequent consequences, and there is a space between the skin and the area, then you should treat this with an enema. (The text suggests using an enema as a less invasive alternative to surgery for cases where there is no deep tissue involvement and the skin appears healthy.)
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And when considering the sinus, if it is large and the arm that you use emits a foul odor, then treat this with an enema using Egyptian medicine which consists of oil, wine, and vinegar, and is received in equal parts into a vessel, and is heated over a fire until the medicine becomes hot and acquires the consistency of honey. (The text suggests using an enema made from a mixture of oil, wine, and vinegar to treat large sinuses with foul odors.)
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; and perform the enema with this in the sinus, and strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine in for a period of two hours. (The text suggests administering the prepared enema mixture into the sinus through its opening, and leaving it in for several hours to promote healing.)
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract it with care; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleaned out and the foul odor has been eliminated. (The text suggests repeating the enema treatment for several days to ensure complete healing of the sinus.)
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes it is enema-ed with ashes of wood, when this medicine is not available to you; and you should take the ash of vine twigs and add water to it, then strain that and perform an enema with it until you are certain that the sinus has been healed. (The text suggests using a simple homemade enema solution made from ashes of vine twigs as an alternative when the recommended Egyptian medicine is not available.)
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or ash water, then perform an enema with water and honey, mixed with three parts of vinegar, and perform an enema with wine and honey mixed together, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine causes the sinus to heal, especially when there is excess astringency and dryness in the wine. (The text suggests two alternative enema solutions that can be used if the patient cannot tolerate the recommended treatments, one using vinegar and the other using wine.)
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are certain that the sinus has healed, then perform an enema with a solution that causes the flesh to grow in it. (The text suggests using a growth-promoting solution for the final stage of sinus treatment, possibly involving some kind of wound healing agent.) [su_note](''Note'': The meaning of "carn" in this context is not clear, and could refer to either new tissue growth or swelling. It is possible that the text suggests using a solution containing inflammatory agents to promote tissue regeneration or healing.)
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And you should take diascordium and dissolve it in rose oil and astringent wine, or perform an enema with certain medications and ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on enemas. (The text suggests using diascordium, a compound made from dried root of wild hemlock, to prepare a solution for an enema. It also mentions other unspecified medications and ointments with specific properties.)
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and will not admit the nozzle of the enema, then you should gradually widen it using a small iron instrument, and place in it a suitable amount of cotton wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been widened. (The text suggests using a small medical instrument to dilate the opening of the sinus if necessary, and recommends using ointments made from Egyptian or basilicon plants as lubricants to facilitate insertion.)
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should sew up its edges with stitches and leave a quantity of it so that an enema can be inserted without addition. (The text suggests using surgical stitches to narrow the opening of the sinus if necessary, and recommends leaving enough space for inserting the nozzle of the enema.)
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening through which the arm protrudes is elevated to higher areas, then dry it at the lowest point that has pus in order to cause the arm to retract downwards, for when the arm is compressed by the swelling of the sinus, flesh is generated there. (The text suggests drying out the sinus opening if it is located higher than other body parts, which may help to redirect the flow of pus and promote healing.)
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you are unable to dry out the sinus at the lowest point as desired, then it is necessary that you prepare the limb with a preparation that allows the arm to move freely and easily without any obstruction or cause for its retention. (The text suggests using some kind of medical preparation or treatment to improve mobility and prevent blockages in the affected limb.) [su_note](''Note'': The meaning of "preparacio" is not clear, and could refer to a surgical procedure, physical therapy, or medication. It may involve releasing any adhesions or scar tissue that are restricting movement, or using some kind of brace or splint to support the limb.)
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medications that can be placed over the sinus in appropriate amounts, as needed, and cover them with linen cloth. (The text suggests using some kind of medical preparation or dressing to promote healing and prevent infection in the affected area.)
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth should be of sufficient size to cover the entire surface of the sinus, and then make an incision with scissors at the right side of the opening of the sinus that is slightly larger than the opening itself. Then apply another cloth soaked in lion's ointment over this incision, positioned away from the opening of the sinus, to relieve the pressure on the arm and prevent excessive drainage. Change the large cloth every few days as needed. (The text suggests using some kind of ointment or salve made from lions to promote healing and reduce swelling in the affected area.)
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But what is on top of the opening of the sinus should be left uncovered at all times so that it can drain properly and prevent any buildup from the arm. (The text suggests leaving the opening of the sinus exposed to allow for proper drainage and prevent fluid accumulation.)
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you can determine if the flow from the arm is abundant or scanty, and if it is digested or not. (The text suggests assessing the quality and quantity of fluid draining from the sinus as an indicator of the effectiveness of treatment.)
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And also consider the location of the sinus and whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess present. (The text suggests evaluating the severity and location of the sinus as part of the overall assessment and treatment plan.)
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your treatment progresses in this way and you see the matter being expelled from the opening of the sinus starting to adhere or become stuck there, then gently loosen it after three days, and when you loosen the affected area, change the dressing for a new one and apply fresh ointment. (The text suggests monitoring the progress of treatment by assessing the appearance of drainage from the sinus opening, and recommends changing dressings and applying fresh ointments as needed to promote healing.)
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if there is a lot of space in the sinus and it becomes fine and subtle, then do not be alarmed by its adhesion, for this indicates that healing is taking place, for some people have slow tissue regeneration in their wounds, and the opposite occurs in others. (The text suggests that adhesions or scar tissue formation in the sinus opening may be a sign of healing, depending on individual factors such as tissue regeneration capacity.)
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if the sinus has been draining undigested pus for many days, then you know that it is not healing; and if there is a delay in the formation of adhesions in the sinus and this takes a long time to happen, then you should adjust your treatment by using drying medications. If the medications are humid in their substance and in their effect, they should be made dry like diascordium when it is added in excess. (The text suggests adjusting the treatment plan if there is no improvement or healing in the sinus after a prolonged period of time, and recommends using drying agents to promote healing.)
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the best remedy for the final healing is to take diascordium and dissolve it in rose oil, and add wine vinegar to its substance, and then apply this mixture to the affected area, using it as needed. (The text suggests using a solution of diascordium in rose oil with added vinegar as a final treatment for sinus healing.)
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And do something similar when there is no arm, smear a sufficient amount of diaprunefy (diaphoretic) ointment, when it is heated enough that it becomes thick, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them all and turn them into powder over the heated honey while it is on the fire, then spread it over a cloth and strengthen it over the sinew; and spread the honey smeared with the powdered mixture over the sinew that has become thick.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes these are administered with the long rod of asterology (and this refers to the celestial lily) and flour of iris and centaury, and use these simple ingredients or mix them, grind them and sift them into powder over the honey that I mentioned; and apply it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then know that the corruption is in the root of it, and now make an incision in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it with a fistular (fistula) treatment, as mentioned above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	On the treatment of paronychia (inflammation of the skin around the nail), chapped nails, digital incisions, and amputations.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Paronychia is a collection of pus that forms below the nail of the finger or toe, and it can also appear on other fingers, and when it becomes prolonged and its healing is less valued, it is either an abscess of an abscess, or it is corrupted and spreads its corruption to the bone of the finger, which causes a foul odor, and it quickly corrupts the entire nail and easily spreads its corruption to the bone inside, causing a gangrenous condition in the finger, and the color of the finger becomes dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And so when you have this as we have said in the division (treatment) and do not see improvement in your treatment, then it is appropriate that you make an incision with iron through all the excess tissue that has become swollen from the nail, and then cauterize the wound with a hot iron because cautery is beneficial for this.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the growths of the nail already press on the flesh inward, and begin to prick it and cause damage, then it is appropriate that you make a fine incision just below the angle of the nail where it is pricking the flesh, and push it back and easily cut the flesh with an incision, and place on it corrosive medicines over what remains of the flesh until it has all fallen off; and treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already spread to the bone, then it is necessary that you cut into the bone and extract (remove) it, because there can be no healing while the bone is corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you should cut into it at one of the nodes (joints) according to where the pain is felt, and treat it until it heals.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail becomes affected by a blow or friction, and causes intense pain, then it is necessary at first to bleed the patient, and then dry out the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse cut from above downwards, making sure that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, because you will cause great pain to the patient and it may lead to the formation of abnormal flesh in the area; and treat the wound with an appropriate remedy for pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	But this condition (ailment), which is common in older men, easily becomes all flesh, or it quickly develops into bones, or it quickly turns into a nail.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And the cause of this (ailment) is in the root of the joint, or it originates from bunions on the toes.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But this one (ailment) that originates from bunions on the toes is not harmful, and this one that originates from joints is often harmful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that have developed into flesh, the incision should be easy, and it is done by cutting along its root with a broad-bladed spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But for those that originate from the root of the joint, the treatment is difficult and should avoid making an incision in it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But for those that are on the toes, it is necessary to make an incision at first in the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw through one of those appropriate saws suitable for this purpose, and then treat it until it heals.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But for a union (consolidation) that occurs between the toes due to their overlapping or by nature of the person's birth, or from consolidation of wounds, burns or similar causes, then it is necessary to cut through this union until the toes return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them (the toes) wrapped in rose oil-soaked cloths to prevent them from becoming easily united, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are properly healed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if there is a union (consolidation) in the toes with the palm, then you should dry this union as prepared and appropriate for the shape of the member (the limb).
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	On incisions of veins, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Veins are varicose veins, and they are thick, swollen veins filled with melancholic superfluities (black bile) which occur in the joints of various parts of the body, and they appear most frequently in the legs, particularly in travelers, laborers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore it is necessary to administer purging of the body with black bile several times using strong evacuation methods, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein (median cubital vein).
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the treatment of varicose veins with iron is done in two ways: one way is that they are cut open and the black blood is drawn out, and another way is that the vein is raised and extracted entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is done in this way: first soak the leg with hot water to soften the thick blood (feculent of the leg), and then tie the leg of the patient high up on the upper thigh near the crease at the back of the knee with a band, and then dry out the vein in one place or two or three places using a wide cut, and then raise the black blood with the thick part of the cloth placed above and below the incision until the desired amount of blood has been released and the patient can bear it.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then apply a dressing on it (the incision), and instruct the patient to abstain from food that generates black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the treatment with bloodletting when the veins are filled, and this will be noticed by the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of varicose veins is done in this way: first raise the leg of the patient and if there are swollen joints then place them in a bath and soak the leg with warm water until it reddens and the veins become more visible; or have the patient exercise vigorously if taking a bath is not possible, until the limb becomes heated.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the cord (ligature) in line with the vein for a cut in the leg or at the back of it near the ankle, or at the base of it near the heel.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then loosen the ligature with hooks and dissect (dissect) the vein from all sides until it becomes noticeable to touch, and this is when you can feel the pulsation of the vein that appears darkened.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so when you make an incision in the swelling, you see that white thing which is the cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then place the knife below so that it raises and separates from the swelling, and suspend it with an ounce or two of a lion-like substance.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then dry the surrounding area around the incision for three fingers' width, and then scrape the swelling from above the vein until it becomes visible.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then raise it and make an incision in the rear section behind the heel, and then extract what comes out through the second incision, and then extract what is above that incision.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that until you extract what is highest or thickest of all the sections, until it is completely removed; and then make an incision there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if it does not obey your attempts to extract and raise, then insert a needle with strong double-strength bile and tie it off, pulling it out; or insert the knife below it and turn your hand inside until it is removed.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And be careful not to cut it; for if it is broken, it becomes difficult to raise and has come to harm the patient through injury.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And once it is completely removed, then place over the wound site a piece of wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil and non-rose oil, and care for the wound until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the vein is contracted with twisting and enveloping of its parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then it is necessary for you to make incisions along all parts of the twisting and at the points of envelopment of it, and then suspend it with hooks until you raise it completely.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful of your incision that you do not cut the vein and do not harm it, for it will be difficult to raise it; and exercise caution in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision made on a vein that has been cut:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of hooks:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not as sharp as hooks nor does it have a pointed tip so that it does not harm the vein; and it has a thick flexibility like a lion, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; it has an excessively large size as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the leg vein:
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs, in hot lands, such as al-Ategi in the land of the Arabs and in the dry lands of India, where there is little vegetation or water.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is easily generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its formation comes from putrefaction that occurs below the skin, just as the poison of snakes and worms inside the body, such as scorpions, earthworms, and maggots are generated between the skin and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And the sign of the onset of this vein is that there is a violent inflammation in the leg, and the affected area becomes swollen; and soon the vein begins to emerge from the site of the swelling, which resembles the root of a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, then you should wrap around it a lead piece weighing one to two drachmas, and tie it there, leaving the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you notice any cause on the outside that affects it, wrap it in lead and bind it there.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it becomes very long, then you should make an incision in one part of it and wrap the remaining portion; and do not cut the end that has emerged, for if you cut it, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted slowly, until it has been completely removed from the body and there remains no cause or obstruction within it.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And this vein emerges in some men to a length of five palms and it has come to my attention that one emerged to a length of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the knife into the opening and make a long incision into the flesh, until all of the contents of the wound have been evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the site for several days with medicines; and then care for it with treatments for abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches, and most often when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to it with many openings, and is emitted from each opening as a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore care for it as we have said in the division, and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the incision of worms generated under the skin, and it is called "bovine disease."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This disease is called "bovine disease" in some lands among us, because it often affects cows, and is a worm that is barely visible, which is born between the skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is felt as it moves from one member to another until it breaks the skin and emerges.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its formation is due to the putrefaction of certain fluids, just as worms and snakes and worms and roundworms are generated in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then it easily infects it and enters, destroying the brain, which happens frequently.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you wish to cure and extract it, then you should not do so unless its movement and appearance is apparent to the touch, and only then should you firmly hold what is above it and below it with pressure and constriction, and then dry and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the purulent matter is in the flesh and you cannot find it, then place a hot cautery over the area where you suspect it to be, and the most feared cause is corruption of the pus, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you see that it (pus) has spread towards the skull near the eye, then strongly press on the eyebrow with a firm twist and dry it out; then extract it. It is necessary that the patient use purification of their body with medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors, and be cautious of foods generating putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Regarding the incision of abscesses (nafir).
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in various parts of the body, and moves from one part to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen what I will now describe to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was summoned to a sick woman in a village, and upon examining her body, I discovered a small inflammation in the vein funis of her arm, and after an hour had passed, I observed that the inflammation moved similarly to a worm crawling upwards, but more gently than if it were moving on its own, as if it were liquid silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved from that location and settled into the muscle, and there it stayed for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it corrected in the other part of the body before reaching the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And it was reported to me that it (the pain) traveled throughout her entire body, as I observed; and it was astonishing how it changed and moved from one part of the body to another with such speed.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had previously observed the same thing in my own heels, according to that method, but I have also seen many cases where pain is moved from one part of the body to another.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not observe it in the heels as I did with the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think it was the same as in the case of my own heels, but rather because the woman was old, with dry body and exposed veins, and she felt that moving windiness (pus).
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backward movement in those who are delicate and have warm bodies with thin veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And how you want to cure it is when the patient feels that pain, then do not apply the treatment to the heel as we have said; instead, press firmly on that area and gently dry it out where the constricted windiness (pus) will come out, and cauterize the spot.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own heels, then cure it through purging the body and expelling windiness (pus), and clean that area with foul-smelling powders and serapias pills and similar remedies.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Regarding the extraction of arrows (sagetas).
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are varied according to their species and the parts of the body where they become embedded, for their diversity is that some have large tips, small ones, concave or blunt ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and those with tongues; and others with barbs.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those that are according to the members and areas in which they become embedded are of two types: either they pierce major organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar ones; and when they penetrate one of these critical organs and display symptoms of imminent death, which I will describe later, it is necessary to avoid extracting the arrow from those areas where death is certain. However, if you do not observe such warning signs and the arrow is not deeply embedded in the organ, then extract it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the symptoms of danger include when an arrow pierces through bone and exits the skullcap, which is located above the brain; this causes violent headaches, temporary blindness, vertigo, numbness in the limbs, inflammation, and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion, yellow bile vomiting, slurred speech, and loss of voice. Additionally, there will be white fluid resembling dust coming out from the wound, and pus-filled blisters similar to watery flesh around it.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if these symptoms are observed, then you must refrain from treating or extracting the arrow, unless it is outside (the body).
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the symptoms of an arrow in the heart when it is near the left nipple and feels like it is lodged in a hard surface, not visible, and the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse, there is black blood oozing from the wound, cold sweats, and fainting; and therefore know that death is imminent.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the symptoms when an arrow has pierced a lung are spume-like blood oozing from the wound, swelling in the veins near the throat, discoloration of the patient, loud exhalations, and requests for fresh air to breathe.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow has struck the sheath located in the feet, then the pain will be near the small ribs, causing great and intense pain with deep sighs, and affecting all parts of the body's muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if an arrow strikes the stomach, then one will notice food or undigested substances coming out of the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if an arrow strikes the belly and becomes embedded in it, then there will be a tear or laceration in the wound, or the membrane or intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for curing it through extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine flows from it, and there is pus or some other substance coming out of it, and the patient feels a strong pain in that area, then know that it is fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But other parts of the body such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, and shoulder blades, the vertebrae in the back, the collarbone, hip, thigh, and similar limbs can be saved if the arrow does not penetrate a vein or artery, and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will report to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows so that you understand it regarding the simple treatment.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The reason for this is that when an arrow strikes a person in the lacrimal gland of their eye next to their nose, and I extracted it from another part, away from the ear canal, and he was healed, and no harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which struck him in the groove of his eye, below the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden, and could not be seen except for a small piece that adhered to its shaft. It was a large arrow with sharp tips, commonly used by Turkish archers, without any ear-like protrusions on the iron head.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And it was a Jew, and no significant harm came to his eye.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man, which had struck him in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow with ear-like protrusions. Then, I inserted my fingers between two of his windpipes and carefully separated them, as the arrowhead was already deeply embedded in his throat. Afterward, I skillfully extracted the arrowhead, and the Christian man was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been struck in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; therefore, after thirty days had passed without any change in his condition, I inserted my fingers around the arrowhead and manipulated it. He was healed, and no adverse effects occurred.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound had healed over it. However, after seven years had passed, the arrowhead emerged near his buttock.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman who was struck by an arrow in her belly, and the wound had healed from within, without any change in her condition. Furthermore, she did not experience any harm during her natural operations (menstruation).
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face and the wound became gangrenous but he did not feel much pain, and many others similar to this one.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's court who was struck in the middle of his nose and it had deviated slightly to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called for the treatment of the wound caused by the arrow within three days after its removal.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And then I examined the wound caused by the arrow very closely, and then I probed gently with my finger, but did not feel anything; however, I could feel a sharp point beneath the right ear, and then I suspected that it was the tip of the arrowhead.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I applied a poultice to the area that has attractive and digestive properties, trusting that the wound would become inflamed so that the location of the arrowhead would appear to me, so that it could dry up on top of it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And no significant accident occurred in the area where the arrow had struck, and I continued to apply the poultice to it for many days without any accidents occurring; and meanwhile, the wound healed and the patient was relieved of his weakness over several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And then I applied a sharp corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it became hot and open, and with my finger I felt around inside and found the tip of the arrowhead that was hidden and attached to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow became clearly visible to me, and I continued this treatment for several months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And because the wound had become more inflamed, I was able to insert forceps into it and extract the arrowhead, which did not cause any significant bleeding. However, I continued to work on finding ways to manipulate and remove it with various tools until one day I was able to successfully extract it using a carefully designed pair of forceps, as shown in the illustration at the end of this chapter. Afterward, I restored the wound to its original state.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And several doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I was able to restore it and heal the wound, and the patient recovered fully and did not suffer any negative consequences as a result.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recommend to you the method of extracting some arrows so that you may establish rules and meanings regarding what I have not said, as the principles and definitions of this art are not contained within this narrative or book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And wise craftsmen compare little to much, and what is present to what is absent, and they discover new operations and instruments according to the nature of foreign causes when accidents occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are embedded except by two means: either through attraction to the location where they have entered, or through opposition to the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And an arrow that is expelled from the location where it entered, or is a fleshy arrowhead and is shot out and expelled.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if it does not obey the issuance of the hour in which it is extracted, then you must leave it for several days until you can soften the flesh that is around it, and so that the attraction of it and its exit may be alleviated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if it is embedded in bone and does not obey you at the appointed time, then you must leave it for several days and repeatedly apply attraction and movement to it each day, and it will be expelled.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your issuance after several days, then you must make an incision in the circumference of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a sharp tool until the area is enlarged around the arrow, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and has already proceeded into one of the ventricles of the brain, and it appears in the patient some of those accidents that I have mentioned, then you must refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it in place for several days, as its being there may be equal to leaving it in for some time. For if the arrow reaches the cerebrum, then death is not prolonged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone of the corpse and does not pass through to the cavity, and the patient remains for several days without any of those symptoms occurring, then you should devise a way to extract the arrow and extract it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply embedded and does not obey your attempt to extract it, then you should administer a poultice around the arrow as we have recommended, and furthermore take care of the wound inside until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden in the body and is numb to sensation, then you should probe and examine that area, and if you find it, then pull it out with appropriate instruments suitable for extracting it.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	But if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in that area, then make an incision on the wound until it is large enough and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	But if it is in the ears and held by them, then cut away the flesh around it completely with all the skill that you can muster; and devise a way to extract it through breaking the ears or twisting them until it becomes possible to do so.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you perform the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is, then use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides until it becomes obedient; and proceed with great care and delicacy to avoid breaking the arrow and make it easier for you to extract it.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	But if you cannot do so at that time, then leave it for several days until the surrounding areas become stronger, and then try again when it becomes easier to do so.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if this causes an opposing flow of blood, then administer what we have said regarding treatment in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be careful not to injure veins or nerves or tendons, and do everything possible to extract the arrow with ease and calmness and patience and steadiness, as you have been recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, you should bend the arrow in such a way that it follows the shape of the wound, as it is more beneficial for the patient to place the arrow in its original position.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible for you, then do what is possible with the available shapes (of the arrowheads).
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But if the arrow is shot from the opposite direction or has already injured some parts outside the body, or if the end of the arrow becomes swollen due to the sensation of the part above the wound and rises up prominently, then dry that area; and let the drying be in accordance with the amount that can be grasped by forceps; and then pull it out, for it is easily extracted at this point.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is lodged in the bone, then twist the bone in the opposite direction until the arrow moves into the bone and expand that area, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	But if this is not possible, then leave it for several days until it becomes easier to do so.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is still in it, then push it further in with your finger.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has fallen out and you want to administer a push, then insert your finger (into the wound) if it is numb, or use a concave instrument so that its concavity fits into the end of the arrow and then push it in with your finger.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then push it in with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow will be easier to extract in this way.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut away all the flesh around the wound if it is possible for you to do so, and furthermore take care of it with whatever is appropriate.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow enters the chest, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is close enough to be touched by your probe, and it is possible for you to dry that area, then do so and be careful not to injure veins or nerves. Extract the arrow carefully and further treat the wound as necessary until it heals.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Here is a description of forceps used for extracting arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of the forceps are shaped like bird's beaks, which are made with serrated edges that grip onto the arrow so that it is not let go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And many types of forceps are made in different sizes, small or large, according to the size and slenderness of the arrow, the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	The form of the concave instrument used to push in the arrow is similar to a bird's feather quill. Its concavity allows it to fit into the end of the arrow and relieve the insertion of the arrow into the wound, while also pushing it gently and steadily.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The form of a blunt instrument used for pushing in the arrow is a rod or probe made of metal or other materials. It is usually smooth and rounded at the end, designed to gently push the arrow into the wound without causing further damage. The diameter and length of the probe may vary depending on the size and depth of the wound, as well as the shape and size of the arrowhead.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Similar to a rod or probe, with a rounded end that is used for pushing in the arrow and relieving its insertion into the wound, especially if it has a concave shape. This instrument can be made of different materials such as metal, wood or plastic, depending on the specific needs and characteristics of each case.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Venesection is a medical procedure in which blood is drawn from a vein, usually for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes. It involves making an incision in the skin over a vein and inserting a hollow needle or tube into the vein to collect the blood. The procedure can be performed using different techniques, such as direct venipuncture, which involves inserting the needle directly into the vein, or indirect venipuncture, which involves inserting the needle into a vein through a superficial vein or a skin fold.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins that are commonly used for venesection are usually three: the basilic vein, the cephalic vein, and the median cubital vein. These veins are superficial and easy to access, making them ideal candidates for blood drawing or other medical procedures. The basilic vein is located on the medial side of the upper arm, while the cephalic vein is found on the lateral side of the forearm. The median cubital vein, which is formed by the union of the basilic and cephalic veins, is located in the antecubital fossa, the area where the elbow bends. These veins are usually marked with a tourniquet or other device to make them more visible during the procedure. Of those mentioned, there are 16 veins in the head that can be used for venesection. These veins include the superior sagittal sinus, inferior sagittal sinus, straight sinus, occipital sinus, marginal sinuses, superficial middle cerebral vein, deep middle cerebral vein, basal vein of Rosenthal, cavernous sinus, sphenoparietal sinus, superior petrosal sinus, inferior petrosal sinus, sigmoid sinus, transverse sinus, and the confluence of sinuses. These veins are used for various medical procedures such as draining excess fluid or blood from the brain, treating aneurysms or other vascular malformations, and administering medication directly into the cerebral circulation. However, venesection in the head is a highly specialized procedure that requires advanced training and expertise. There are two pulsating veins that are close to the ears, called "templars" in herbs, and two veins that are apparent in the lacrimal areas of both eyes, called "aspicientz". Additionally, there is a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, a vein in the end of the nose, two veins in the neck called "jugulars", and two veins each on the upper and lower lips, which are called "angulars". There are also two veins that are located below the tongue, which are called "sublinguals". These are all specific veins that are referred to by name.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are commonly used for venesection in the arms are five: Of these five veins in the arm, one is the cephalic vein, which is located near the latissimus dorsi muscle and is commonly called "the vein of the head". It is a small vein that is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and another branch from the cephalic vein. This vein is also known as "the vein of the whole body" because it runs along the entire length of the arm.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	In the foot and calf, there are three main veins:
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The benefit of the veins near the temples is for treating chronic headaches, migraines, epilepsy, and old ulcers on the scalp.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The recommended method of bloodletting from the veins near the temples is as follows: first, have the patient lie down with their head resting on a pillow. Then, apply a wide and clean cloth to the occipital area of the patient's head where both veins are located. Use firm pressure to massage the cloth in circular motions for several minutes.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Take the scalpel lancet, which is sharp and pointed, then insert it gently beneath the vein at the bend of the elbow until the venesection needle reaches the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand with the vein and elbow towards the upper parts, and make an incision in the vein with an incising cut.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers or thereabouts, and allow blood to flow from it as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply pressure with a piece of cloth or gauze to stop the bleeding and leave it in place until it heals.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And as previously mentioned in the beginning of the book, the incision and subsequent cauterization of these veins has already been discussed.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	The benefit of bloodletting from the two arteries in the temples is for treating chronic headaches, hard and persistent migraines, eye diseases, and acute swelling in the legs caused by an excess of fluid.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The recommended way to perform bloodletting on these arteries is as follows: first, constrict the patient's neck with a cloth until the two arteries become apparent by touch and their pulsations can be felt under your fingers. Then, use a lancet or other sharp instrument to make an incision in one of the arteries, allowing blood to flow freely. After the desired amount of blood has been released, apply pressure with a clean cloth to stop the bleeding and allow the wound to heal. Repeat the process for the second artery if necessary.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then raise the arm above the vein towards the upper parts with your index finger pointing at it, insert the venesection needle obliquely beneath the vein until it is visible, and elevate the vein with the needle; incise the vein as you have done with the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then release the constriction on the patient, place your finger over the vein for an hour, and apply a bandage and pressure with a cloth above it with firm constriction, and leave it until it heals.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And the reminder of their incision and extraction has already been mentioned at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so the help of bloodletting from the vein in the forehead is similar to bloodletting from the cephalic vein for ancient facial illnesses, migraines, fever, and fetid ulcers.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of bloodletting depends on what you recommend to you, that is, the patient should strengthen their neck with a band so that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a fossorium, which looks like this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the pointed end of the fossorium on top of that vein and strike it with an inclined or other object in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then undo the perforation of the patient and strengthen it so that it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes a vein is opened with a large bloodletting needle, but it is not necessary for the bloodletting to have an acute tip like other bloodlettings; instead, it should be of blunt extremity, and perforate that in a transverse manner because the bone is close and easily broken if the bloodletting is fine.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the help of the two veins that are near the lacrimal (tear) ducts in the eyes for scabies of the feet, for fever and inflammation in the feet, and for illnesses of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a band, and then perform bloodletting on them while you stand over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting should be done in a manner that is transverse and slightly longitudinal with small incisions, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the bloodletting instrument is fine, its tip may easily break off.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place pressure on that area to stop the bleeding, and strengthen it for one night, and then undo the pressure.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But bloodletting from the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever, violent headache, and facial illnesses and migraines that occur in the face, especially if they are ancient or long-standing.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of bloodletting from the nose is that the patient should strengthen their neck and turn their head towards your left hand, and then take a slender, long lancet and insert it into the middle of the bridge of the nose in a straight manner because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It is necessary for you to gradually uncover your hand with the bloodletting instrument and let the blood flow according to your need; and then bind it up for one night because it heals easily.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the help of bloodletting from the two jugular veins is for constriction of the throat, the onset of leprosy and many illnesses, impetigo, and corrosive sores such as herpes.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that the patient should turn their head downwards for each one on their neck with force; and the practitioner should stand over the patient's head, and the patient should be seated on a stool.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform bloodletting on the vein with a broad, small lancet gradually; and extract blood in moderate quantities or as much as you see is necessary; and then do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then undo the binding and strengthen both veins with mild pressure to prevent the patient from being overexerted, and leave it overnight because the wound will be healed by morning.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the help of bloodletting from the Algerian veins is beneficial for small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad sores, fissures, and bad sores that are on the nose or around it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you should have the patient sit in front of you, and strengthen their neck with a band, and then turn their lips and look for two veins, one on each side of the lip; and the identification of each one is by the darkness of both, especially around the small black veins; and then make an incision for each one with an incising instrument.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are uncertain, and do not know which one to choose, then make an incision on the larger or more obvious of those two veins.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do the same for the two veins that are in the upper lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is customary to incise the two veins that are in the lower lip more often.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the help is in bloodletting from the cephalic vein for swellings in the throat, illness of the uvula, and illnesses of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you should follow the patient with your hands in front of their mouth and above their chin, and raise their tongue and look beneath their tongue for one side of the vein and the other, and the color of each one tends towards blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform bloodletting on each one; and be careful not to uncover your hand too much when bloodletting those, because there are arteries beneath them.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are commonly bloodletted in the groin are those that flow in all men, and bloodletting from them is done in two ways: either by applying myrtle or olive with fine subtlety; or by drying with a scalpel, which is called alnesil, and this is its shape:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnesil is what is required for drying, and its blade is sharp and fine according to the width of the veins and the tightness of them.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Shape of myrtle bloodletting instrument:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Let its blade be as wide as necessary, and it is suitable for opening concave veins that appear prominent and full of thick blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the shape of olive bloodletting instrument:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this bloodletting instrument is of smaller width and has a sharper point, and it is suitable for bloodletting from fine veins that contain thin blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the help of bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: because it draws blood from illnesses that are below the throat and those that affect the feet and the belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And the person performing bloodletting, when bloodletting from that one, should be careful and cautious, because there is an artery below it, and if they make a mistake and pierce the artery with the bloodletting instrument, it will cut the artery and cause excessive bleeding, so it is important not to use a sharp needle but rather a scalpel for cauterization.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilic vein is not visible by clear indication, then it is best to move on to the other one or look for a branch of it, or perform bloodletting in the crook of the elbow, where it is easily visible; and then cauterize that area with an alnessil, as previously mentioned.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you wish to perform bloodletting in the middle of the arm, then first feel for the location by touching the area between the bicep and triceps muscles, and make a mark on that spot; then bend the arm and cauterize the vein with a concave incision using an alnessil, as previously mentioned; and be careful not to hit the artery with percussion in that area.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you notice that the binding causes swelling in the marked location, then this inflammation is due to the artery, and therefore it should be avoided.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see blood flow like the urine of an infant, and it is thin and red, then know that this is arterial blood; and in that case, hold your finger over the incision for a long time; and then apply pressure with your finger to stop the bleeding, and if the blood continues to flow, because many times it does, then hold the arm up and leave it alone.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And be careful of the patient's mucus and be cautious around them, and do not harm them for several days until they are healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the bleeding has not stopped and you do not have medicine to address it, then locate the artery and cut it if it is visible, because its tip will contract and the blood flow will stop; or take a piece of bark and puncture it, and put a piece of meat over the vein with gentle pressure and bandages for the next day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat it with what was mentioned previously for stopping blood flow.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And stopping the blood flow from an artery is difficult in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of swelling in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	And bloodletting from the fusca vein is helpful for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body, because it branches off from both the basilic and cephalic veins, as previously mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And the person performing bloodletting from this vein should be cautious because there is a nerve below it; and if they hit the nerve with the bloodletting instrument, it will cause numbness or stupor in the patient, and the healing process will be difficult and often incomplete. This nerve can be felt easily by many people, but for others it may be more subtle and hidden, and therefore one should proceed carefully to avoid hitting it. If the nerve is hit, then cauterization with an alnessil is recommended to stop the bleeding, while avoiding further damage to the nerve.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of making an incision in the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the heels.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is appropriate in this case, if you want the incisions to be made with an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped fleam, because it is safer than any other vein, since it does not damage the artery or nerves.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, you should be careful when making the incision to avoid only puncturing the cubital fossa, but instead look for a softer spot and not press too hard on it until you are sure that there is a vein under the fleam after performing the initial percussion in that area several times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it is easy for an abscess to form in some people when they are not incised at the first percussion, but you will not notice that abscess right away.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	However, the quality and circumstances of that incision and its effects require careful consideration for correction.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing to know is that incisions should only be administered for the preservation of health and as a precaution against illness, and should be made on one of the veins in the forearm, namely: cephalic, basilic or cubital; and should be made at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals when signs of fullness appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And incisions should be made every third day or as soon as three hours have passed since sunrise.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	However, incisions should be administered when necessary and convenient, both at night and during the day, at any hour and in all seasons.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	It is advisable that children should not be incised until they are 14 years old, and pregnant women should not be incised until the fourth month of pregnancy and up to the seventh, and elderly people who have already passed 60 years of age should not be incised.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	If someone wishes to be incised in any way, it is advisable that they clean their intestines before the incision with an enema of lion's dung if there is a retained fecal matter in them, so that the veins do not draw excess fluid from the purified intestines during the incision, which could cause contamination and affect the main members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	Those suffering from chronic nausea and hangovers, those in a state of intoxication or illness, those with dropsy, and those who fear that the incision may cause colic, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, physical exhaustion, fasting, vigilance, or any other factor that weakens the body or spirit should not be incised.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And it is advisable to consider the refinement of humors beforehand if the blood is thick, by means of food and drink, and with medications if that is possible.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And it is advisable to take a bath if there is no reason not to, or engage in physical exercise so that the blood becomes refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the incision during the daytime hours, around the third hour, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And make sure that the area of incision is protected from all harmful influences on that day, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and all physical discomforts, such as pain, excessive effort, diarrhea, and similar symptoms.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at the time of the incision, make sure that the causes of health are present, such as fragrances and perfumes, balms, and similar items according to the degree of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And have the person performing the incision sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the person being incised.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And make sure the person being incised extends their arm, and that the person performing the incision wipes it with their hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature around the limb with a strap and wrap it twice.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And make sure the ligature is applied with moderation, because if it is too tight or loose, it will prevent blood flow or cause excessive bleeding.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And when applying the ligature, make sure that the person being incised rubs their hands together until the veins become swollen and can be felt.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And the person performing the incision should anoint their fleam with a little bit of antiseptic oil properly; then place the index finger of their left hand on top of the vein, below the location where you want to make the incision, so that the vein moves slightly away from it. The percussion should be performed delicately so as not to damage the vein. If you press on a vein that is filled with gas, it will contract when you apply pressure, and if the fleam does not cut the vein or only makes a small incision, then it has been successful.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, it is important that the person performing the incision be steady and attentive to all these factors.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And after making the incision, if you have found the vein in one attempt, that is good. If not, try another spot just below or slightly above the original location, or make a quick incision if the area is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is infected or the patient is frightened, then you should wait a day or two and not tighten the ligature, because this could cause an infection or prevent healing. The person being incised should also avoid bathing during this time.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And if necessary, you can repeat the incision after a few days.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the incision is small and the blood flows slowly, and you fear that there will not be enough blood flow, then you can make another incision in the same location with caution and adjust it slightly to increase the size of the opening before the area becomes infected. This should be done quickly, because a small incision can easily become infected in some people.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	However, if you see that the area is already infected, then do not make another incision in the same location, because this will not solve anything. Instead, apply a little bit of oil to a part of the wound to alleviate the symptoms.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better to use oil in this case than any other substance.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	Similarly, in all incisions where you are cutting veins to prevent blood clots, apply a little bit of oil to the area, and use theriac, alfadoc, or sagzenea when making an incision on one side of the area to refine the blood and make it flow better if it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	If a large abscess forms in the area of incision due to multiple causes and primarily in those who have not bled regularly or only had one incision, or where the incision was small or near a vein, then you should apply a warm, wet sponge soaked in salt water to the area for an hour. This will help dissolve any infection.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	It is important to apply the warm compress as soon as the bleeding from that vein has stopped or when you have made an incision in another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	If some black or green discoloration remains in the area for several days, do not be concerned. However, if you wish to speed up healing, you can apply a mixture of aloe and myrrh, or crushed mint leaves or chamomile to the area.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	Many times, abscesses and swellings occur in the basilic vein when making an incision there, so it is important to be careful.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore, if you feel softness when you press on the area, continue to apply pressure until the swelling goes down, because this indicates that there is a problem or infection. In this case, be sure to apply one of the remedies mentioned earlier to prevent bleeding from an artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply a styptic poultice to the area to harden it and promote healing. Continue treating the wound with other remedies until it has healed completely.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	It is important to extract the correct amount of blood from each person based on their vitality and the color of their blood as it appears.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	If the blood is dark, let it flow until it becomes red; if it appears thick, let it continue to flow until it thins out; and if it is flowing too quickly, let it continue to flow until its speed decreases. This will ensure that you extract the correct amount of blood based on each person's individual needs and characteristics.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	If a person is overweight and needs to have blood extracted, then the incision in the vein should be larger and deeper so that sufficient blood can be removed.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	If a person is weak and needs to have blood extracted, then the incision should be smaller and more shallow, and made in multiple locations to prevent excessive bleeding.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	The most effective method of venesection is a transverse incision, not a puncture wound.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method of venesection is safer because it prevents excessive bleeding and nerve damage, and is more desirable and safe than making an incision along the length of the vein.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	If someone is prone to fainting after venesection, you should treat them beforehand with a piece of bread soaked in either milk and honey or oxymel that has been warmed slightly, and extract the blood in three or four stages. This will help prevent fainting by gradually reducing their vitality.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	If the person is of a cold and moist constitution, they should take bread soaked in an electuary made with myrrh or honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar herbs, or in a fragrant and aromatic electuary before venesection. This will help warm the body and prevent any adverse effects from the blood loss.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	If fainting occurs during venesection due to excessive bleeding, then the person should drink a mixture of meat broth and fragrant electuary, and use aromatics such as aloe or myrrh to help stop the bleeding. They should also apply a compress soaked in the same fragrant electuary to their forehead to further aid in recovery.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	In addition, use the other methods of treatment for fainting that I mentioned in the chapter on this topic, specifically those involving evacuation of the body. This may include purgatives or enemas to help remove excess blood and restore balance to the system.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	For those who wish to lighten their arms and thin their blood gradually, it is recommended that they undergo venesection in stages, with small amounts of blood removed on consecutive days, based on the individual's level of weakness. This will help restore balance to the system and prevent any adverse effects from excessive bleeding.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	However, for those who wish to lighten their arms and thin their blood in two stages, and have strong constitutions, it is recommended that they undergo venesection again after seven or nine hours have passed since the initial incision. This will allow sufficient time for the body to recover from the first session while still providing enough stimulation to promote further evacuation of waste products.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	However, for those who wish to draw blood from their body in the opposite direction of its natural flow, it is recommended that they undergo venesection on the second or third day after the initial incision. This will help prevent any adverse effects from excessive bleeding and ensure proper balance in the system.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	However, for those with a body that already has too much blood and is overheated, causing fever, it is recommended to remove a large amount of blood in one session, making the incision larger and deeper than usual until fainting occurs. This will help restore balance to the system and prevent further complications. However, it is important to follow all necessary precautions during venesection, including monitoring vital signs and applying pressure to the site after the procedure to prevent excessive bleeding. Negligent or inexperienced practitioners may cause death instead of fainting if they do not take proper care.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	It is not advisable to apply excessive force or bend the arm when trying to draw blood from a clotted vein that is difficult to penetrate. Doing so can cause damage to the vein and potentially lead to infection or other complications. Instead, it is recommended to use gentle pressure and make multiple small incisions if necessary to ensure proper blood flow. This will help prevent any adverse effects from excessive bleeding and ensure proper balance in the system.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	If the vein is clogged and it becomes difficult to extract blood, you can wait until later to perform a second venesection or use the initial incision to continue drawing blood as needed. You can also apply a styptic agent such as alum or tyracium alfarach to help coagulate any excess bleeding. Finally, you can gently press on the area with a compress soaked in sage tea to help promote healing and prevent infection.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity requires you to bleed the patient a second time and it is not excused, then bleed that person on the same location or on the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis of the arm" is to be punctured in place of the cubital or basilic vein when they cannot be found or are hidden, because it is made up of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the venesection is that the patient places their hand in warm water until the vein appears distinctly and the puncture site becomes red.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then tie it off tightly above the incision with a ligature of medium size; and then perform the venesection crosswise, not longitudinally or laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide and perform the venesection shallowly on the joint of the hand, making only a small cut.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to run into the water until you have achieved your necessary amount.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and instead, immerse the body of the patient in warm water during wintertime to stop the bleeding.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the venesection of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because below it there is no pulsating vein or nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the venesection of the cephalic vein in the right hand is appropriate for diseases of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the venesection is that you tie off the hand tightly with a ligature or your own hand, having placed it in warm water until the vein becomes engorged and distinctly visible; then make the incision crosswise, and if it should go too deep, it will not harm anything.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	Take care not to injure your hand with the venesection, because below it are nerves that are stripped of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to run into it, because if you do not immerse it in warm water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and flow will be prohibited.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when the necessary amount of blood has been extracted, then apply oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from closing up prematurely; similarly, it is appropriate to do this in every straight vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of venesection from the left hand is that it is appropriate for diseases of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in this venesection as you have done in the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of venesection from the saphenous vein is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as those of the womb, and retention of menstrual flow, and diseases of the thighs and old ulcers on the hips and legs, and similar ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the venesection is that the patient places their foot in warm water and massages it until the veins become visible; then tie a band around the ankle, and the location of the vein should be marked with your finger, and from there its branches extend across the surface of the foot in many directions.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	Therefore, make the incision in a wide branch below the knee, towards the calf, because that is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you perform the venesection on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below it, and make your incision crosswise with a sharp blade as if you wanted to cut through it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let the venesections be few.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse the patient's foot in warm water and allow the blood to run into it until it has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the lancet errs in its first pass, then make another pass with it close by, because that location is safe; but do not be concerned about damaging the vein, only take care to avoid the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly, do the same with the saphenous vein in the other foot.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And the location of the sciatic vein is as we have said, below the calf in the lower wilderness area.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of venesection from this location is for pain in the hip caused by congealed blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the venesection is that the patient enters a bath and binds their leg with a long thin band around the calf above the ankle, causing it to swell slightly but not visibly.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when the vein appears, then make the incision according to your ability and crosswise, which is better; or cut through it with a sharp blade or cut it with a dry blade, because the location is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And in most men it is rather narrow; and if you find that vein and do not perceive its entirety, then make the incision on a branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot near the auricular and anular joints.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful of the nerves, and allow the blood to flow in the quantity that you desire.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then release the ligature and place your hand over the site of the venesection, applying pressure to it, because it will heal lightly.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Regarding cupping and the qualities of using those:
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Cupping glasses can be used for corns (hardened layers of skin), inflammation or pain. The heat and suction created by the cup can help to draw out impurities, increase blood flow, and promote healing in the affected area.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Cupping can be performed in two ways: one way is with scarification and bloodletting, and the other way is without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	The cupping method that is performed without scarification can also be done in two ways: with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	There are 14 locations on the body where cups can be applied with scarification and bloodletting, including:
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Cupping does not extract blood from large veins, but rather from small capillaries dispersed in the flesh, and therefore it does not have the same effect as venesection, which is more direct. Additionally, cupping should not be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by congestion until the body has been completely evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	However, if necessity requires cupping for illness or congestion, it should be administered at the beginning of each month and at the end of it, as well as in the middle and at various times throughout.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason why some people may require cupping is that their blood has become congested and multiplied to the point where it needs to be released through cupping, which can alleviate heaviness and swelling in the head. Those who benefit from cupping include individuals who experience congestion or inflammation in the face, neck, or back; those with pimples, acne, or dark circles under the eyes; those who have a pale complexion or poor circulation; those who suffer from headaches, dizziness, or anxiety; and those who experience bleeding gums or mouth ulcers. Additionally, cupping may be recommended for individuals who snore heavily or have trouble sleeping, as well as those who experience night sweats, fevers, or other symptoms related to illness or infection.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when any of the aforementioned conditions are present, and particularly during the third or middle of the month, it is recommended that cupping be performed at least two or three hours after sunrise.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	The benefit of cupping on the neck is that it helps alleviate heaviness in the head and promotes drainage from the ears, but it's important to note that this should be part of a larger effort to promote overall detoxification and evacuation of the body. Cupping on the neck can help stimulate circulation and lymphatic flow, which can aid in the removal of toxins and waste products from the body. However, cupping alone is not sufficient to address underlying health issues or promote long-term wellness.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this incision is in the place of bloodletting of the cephalic vein. (The cephalic vein is a superficial vein in the arm, and "bloodletting" was a common medical practice in medieval times to try to cure various ailments.)
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not permitted for someone with leprosy or a catarrh to use it (the incision), as it would cause great harm to them. (Leprosy and catarrh were medical conditions in medieval times - leprosy was a chronic infectious disease, and catarrh referred to inflammation of the mucous membranes, often associated with colds or allergies.)
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And for that reason, it is not appropriate for the elderly or those with frail constitutions to use this incision. (The phrase "for that reason" suggests that the reason for not using the incision on certain people has already been mentioned in the text.)
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for someone whose attention is focused solely on the incision, it is necessary to instruct the phlebotomist to move their hand away from the incision slightly after making it, in order to prevent unconsciousness (or "the generation of oblivion"). (The word "phlebotomist" refers to a medical professional who performs bloodletting.)
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But venesection (or bloodletting) on the humeral vein is done in the location of the basilic and fusca veins: and for that reason it is used to treat asthma, and constriction of the throat, and chest pain, and cough, and bloating. (The "humeral vein" refers to a large vein located in the upper arm, while the "basilic vein" is another name for the cephalic vein mentioned earlier. The "fusca vein" may refer to a superficial vein on the forearm or leg.)
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to pull out the humeral incision slightly, as placing it too low can cause weakness in the body and stomach. (The phrase "pull out" may refer to making the incision less deep or removing the needle used for bloodletting.)
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And venesection (or bloodletting) on the temple is used to treat accidental pains in the head, eye diseases, migraines, dizziness, and toothaches; and it is done in the location of the basilic vein. (The "temple" refers to a region of the skull on either side of the forehead.)
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is necessary to instruct the phlebotomist not to press their hand too hard during incision, as this can cause the artery to be punctured and lead to excessive bleeding. (The word "incision" here likely refers to the act of making a small cut or opening in the skin.)
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And venesection (or bloodletting) below the chin is used to treat halitosis in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar ailments in the mouth; and it is done in the location of the aliheric veins that are located on the two lips. (The word "aliheric" may be a variant spelling of "aliquid", which means "something" or "anything" in Latin, but its meaning here is unclear.)
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But venesection (or bloodletting) on the two "spatulas" (possibly referring to the ears or some other body part) is used to treat headaches caused by an excess of heat in the body. (The word "caphatan" may be a variant spelling of "cephalalgia", which means "headache" in Latin.)
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And venesection (or bloodletting) on the two sides of the temples is used to treat the same conditions as bloodletting from three veins - namely, the cephalic, basilic and fusca veins - because it draws blood from all those veins that are more numerous and smaller than the larger ones, and helps the blood flow to reach all three veins. (The word "focils" here likely refers to the temples or some other body part.)
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the phlebotomist not to proceed too far in making incisions, as the location is exposed and vulnerable, with nerves and arteries just beneath the surface of the skin. (The word "scarificacio" here likely refers to the act of making multiple small cuts or incisions.)
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And this is the venesection (or bloodletting) that is performed on the hips, and it is used to treat hemorrhoids in the buttocks and ulcers located below. (The word "alshosses" here likely refers to the hips or some other body part.)
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary to instruct the phlebotomist to use a large incision, and that it be made with iron, as this location requires a deep cut; and light, subtle incisions should not be used, but rather those made with scarification. (The word "eram" here likely refers to iron or some other metal used in medical instruments.)
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But venesection (or bloodletting) on the ribs should be performed with great care and precision, as it draws blood from all over the body, and is used to treat chronic pains in the lungs, chest, and bladder; and it induces menstruation, and is used to treat bloating and other ailments. It is done in the location of the two "sophonas" (possibly referring to veins located near the ribs), as well as the alahorcoben and two clavicles. (The meaning of the word "alahorcoben" here is unclear, but it may refer to a specific location on the body.)
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, this type of venesection (or bloodletting) can greatly weaken the entire body and cause fainting spells in some individuals.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And the benefit of venesection (or bloodletting) on the clavicles is similar to that of venesection on the ribs. (The word "alahorcoben" here likely refers to veins located near or in the clavicles.)
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the positioning for venesection (or bloodletting) is that the incision should be placed at the beginning of the vein and gradually increased in size through careful suction; it should not be prolonged, but rather gently released and left to heal on its own, allowing the humors to flow naturally to the site.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not stop repeating this process and continuing until you see the area become red, swollen, and notice the appearance of blood flowing from the incision.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should make small incisions with a scalpel and gradually increase suction, while paying close attention to the disposition of the body's organs. (The word "dispozicio" here likely refers to the arrangement or placement of internal organs in relation to the location of the incision.)
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a person with tender skin and a tendency to bruise easily, you should make only one incision and not more, in order to prevent the area from becoming ulcerated. (The word "tendra" here likely means "soft" or "delicate", while "rars pors" may refer to someone who is prone to bruising.)
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the phlebotomist to widen and deepen the incision slightly, while performing suction with gentle ease. (The word "amplifique" here likely means "to make wider", while "pronde" may mean "deep". The phrase "atempre la succio am facilitat" suggests that suction should be performed carefully and gently.)
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, then you should make two incisions, as the first incision will open up the pathway for the subtle suction of both the blood and its watery component. (The word "grossitut" here likely means "thick", while "subtiliacio" may mean "refined" or "delicate". The phrase "a la aquositat de lu" suggests that the second incision will help to remove any excess fluid from the site.)
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second incision, you should seek out and ensure the complete removal of thickened blood. (The word "perscrutacio" here likely means "search" or "examination", while "extraccio" means "removal". The phrase "del sanc gros" suggests that the focus of this second incision is to remove any remaining thick clots.)
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very viscous, then a third incision should be made to ensure that all of it has been removed. (The word "feculent" here likely means "viscous" or "sticky", while "derier" may mean "remaining". The phrase "sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada" suggests that the third incision should be made carefully and with precision.)[1](https://www.definitions.net/definition/feculent)
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when you want to extract the blood gradually or in small amounts, one incision will suffice. (The phrase "abasta a nos" means "is enough for us", while "pauc a pauc" suggests that only a small amount of blood needs to be removed.)
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you want to extract a large amount of blood, make multiple incisions; and if you know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make deep incisions. (The word "mot" here likely means "many" or "multiple", while "preonda" may mean "deep". The phrase "scarificacio preonda" suggests that these deeper incisions should be made with care and precision.)
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the depth of the incision should only reach as deep as the skin's surface, no further. (The word "codena" here likely means "skin". The phrase "le terme de scarificacio" suggests that this is a description of the proper technique for making incisions in venesection.)[1](https://www.definitions.net/definition/scarificacion)
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person's skin is thick, tough, dark, and their pores are tight, then it is necessary to apply a liberal amount of soothing and widening oil to the locations where the incisions will be made; if it is summertime, use aloe or violet oil, or oil from double nuts, or cemensa de coja; and if it is wintertime, use narcissus oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, blood or similar oils. (The phrase "untatz lenitius" means "apply soothingly", while "apertius resolutius" means "open and widening". The word "cove" means "it is necessary". The phrase "locs de las ventosas" means "places for incisions". The word "dossas" means "double". The phrase "cemensa de coja" may refer to an oil made from the nut of a certain type of tree, possibly a walnut or almond. The word "narci" may be a misspelling of "narcissus".)
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the excess is thick and coarse, then use oils such as marjoram oil, balsamita oil, aloe oil, or anise oil. (The word "superfluitat" means "excess", likely referring to the thickness and coarseness of the skin. The phrase "amaranti" is a variant spelling of "amaranth", which refers to a type of plant with red or purple flowers. The word "balsamita" may refer to a type of aromatic herb, while "aneti" means "dill".)
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the phlebotomist has wide pores and tender skin, then it is forbidden to use oil, and instead, these locations for incisions should be washed with water or with cold solar water, or with water from coja (possibly a type of tree), or with borderla waters, etc.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for someone whose blood has a lot of moisture, wash their incisions with sour wine or water from myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for someone whose superfluities are thick, wash their incisions with old wine or water from sansuc (sage), which is majoram, or from the decoction of dill, or from chamomile, and similar to those.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that the venesection be performed before bathing; it is necessary to administer it immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep soon after the venesection.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is it that a venesection patient or phlebotomist must do before venesection?
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the phlebotomist or the one who is to be bled is choleric and has sharp and inflamed blood, then it is necessary for them to take cooling agents, such as sour grapes, endive in vinegar and lettuce, scabious, julep, and similar things.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And they should eat foods such as poultry, game birds, and dishes seasoned with vinegar, and similar things.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those who have a cold constitution, it is appropriate to give them to drink theriac of alivivia, or theriac of alsecanabin of seeds, and sumac, and middle-aged wine with a strong odor; and let it be recommended to him to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods that are hot and spicy, and peas, and cakes, and small birds and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is appropriate that on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, they drink more than they eat.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is appropriate to give some men to drink theriac of alpharac or medicine of musk, that is muscada or alcelita before bloodletting or phlebotomy, or soon after, so that the principal members are strengthened and the blood is refined; and they should not take those scalefacts.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the bloodletting that is by scraping should be done by making incisions on the liver, and above the spleen and gout, and above the navel, in the locations of the joints, and the bladder of the loins, because these members do not tolerate scraping on them.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desirable for those to be done who need withdrawal of blood from a member, such as making an incision on the breast in illness of blood flow from the blood of the nose; and they use that so that the cold and condensed windiness of the member is dissolved, such as making an incision on the stomach and navel; for that rarefies the member and scrapes it, and removes pain which resolves windiness.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already done on the tonsils when they become inflamed or swollen, because by virtue of strong and light withdrawal, it removes inflammation and eradicates swelling from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, it does when it is done on the liver and spleen for windiness that is contained in them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these bloodlettings are administered using only suction, and some times they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes, they are administered full of thick water in illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And that is because the bloodletting cup should be full and larger, that is to say warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of bloodletting administered with fire: let the width of the orifice be the size of two fingers, as we have made it; and let the quantity of the vacuum be the measure of a palm; and let it be in its place, in the location that is in the circuit, the measure of it, the opening be small according to the quantity that enters it, the size of a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Let it be made of iron or citrus tree, with thick edges, lion-shaped, curved and smooth, so that it does not harm the member in its position on it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And let there be a horizontal bar of iron or of steel in the middle of it, where a candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And let this bloodletting cup be much larger than the one that we have recommended; and the smaller one according to the illnesses and the state of the person who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the bloodletting cups for infants and weak people are different than those for young people and sturdy bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the way to place this bloodletting cup with fire on the member is that one should extend a piece of wood with fire decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place it in the middle of the horizontal bar in the middle of the bloodletting cup, so that the fire is lit around the edge, so as not to burn the skin of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it should be placed on the member of the patient, and the finger should be over the opening that we have mentioned, until when we have the bloodletting cups and do not need to press the finger and the vapor rises over that opening, at that time the bloodletting cup will be dissolved immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then ignite the piece of wood in its way, and repeat that if you need to do so.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in the bloodletting that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, with water, without a horizontal bar or opening, and it is not administered except by filling it with water, and placing it on the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this bloodletting cup, the larger it is, the better it is, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capital Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not administered on many members, but only on those in which there is no possibility of placing bloodletting cups due to their small size, such as the foot and gums and similar ones; or on a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and nose and similar ones.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the way to use those that, if you have found leeches in clean muddy waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them be left in dirty water day and night until they are hungry, and there remains no food in their stomachs; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with bloodletting and bloodletting cups; and let the member of the patient be rubbed until it becomes red; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and satiated.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to apply suction to the area with a bloodletting cup, it is more beneficial in treatment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the area with sour wine and then rinse it with plenty of water; and rub it and express it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the course of bleeding from the leeches is prolonged, and it is dripping, then take a cloth soaked in cold water, and place it over it until the dripping stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding is excessive, then sprinkle vitriol trissat or other styptic powders on it until the bleeding stops; or place over the area dry beans that have been cooked, and let them adhere to the area until the bleeding stops.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is appropriate, if necessary, to repeat bloodletting, when it is possible to change those (leeches).
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the use of leeches is forbidden, then either make an incision on the area to cause fresh bleeding or insert a needle in the spots where blood can be drawn; and let them (the incisions/needle) be covered, because leeches will detach as soon as they sense that blood has been drawn.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them (leeches) to fall off, dust a little bit of aloe powder, or salt, or ashes on them, and they will detach immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the third section: On Restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is very important in the medical art, and it concerns the restoration of bone fractures and dislocations caused by accidents.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, my son, know that the foolish doctors and uneducated people boast about this chapter, those who have never looked at the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	Therefore, this knowledge has been lost in our land, and I have never forgotten it throughout my life; nor have I relied on recent teachings but instead through long study of the ancient books and understanding of them, extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And let me guide you with my experience and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	I have already described in this chapter everything that my science contains and what I have experimented with, so that I may summarize it for you and free myself from the task of lengthy explanations; I have summarized it at the end in a summary form, and demonstrated it through clear descriptions, as well as shown various forms of instruments used in this treatment, just like I did in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter: [This is the start of a new section or topic in the medical treatise.]
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summary and collections on the nature of bone fractures: on those that require preliminary discussion before we begin to remember the various parts and types of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, it is appropriate to state at the beginning of this chapter the summaries of my discussion and the chapters that require understanding beforehand. The practitioner must be well-versed in these topics and stand firm on their truth, so that you and those who learn this noble art from you may have a solid foundation.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And so I say that when you come across a fracture or dislocation or sprain or injury, it is necessary to first consider phlebotomy (bloodletting) or lancing the affected area, or both if no contrary cause forbids it, such as debility of strength, or if it's an infant, elderly person, or during a time of intense heat, cold, or other extreme conditions. [Please note that medical advice has changed since medieval times, and these practices may not be recommended today.]
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let them be satisfied with light meals of fresh herbs and bird meats and crustaceans; and prohibit heavy foods and overfilling oneself with rich and fatty foods, which can cause the veins to fill with blood, until you are certain that there is no danger of abscess. And if there is no concern for effusion (leakage) of matter in the limb. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their usual diet and habits, as is customary for them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And so when the broken bone begins to heal, it is important that the patient eat nutritious foods that are rich and heavy with viscosity, such as wheat-based dishes cooked in water, rice, peas, cow's udder, marrow, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar foods. With this diet, the healing of the fracture will be quicker and better. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that bones broken in the elderly and very young cannot be healed and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	However, bones can be healed and consolidated according to their nature at all times when they belong to individuals in the middle age range, due to their moist and pliable limbs. And such bones are also continuously and solidly joined together by the end of the healing process, just like the bones of young children. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	Nonetheless, nature often provides a natural course of healing to the fractured bone by adding flesh around the site of the break, causing it to adhere and strengthen together until they become one, firm union, just like in the case of fire that slowly but surely solidifies materials together, unless some other factor prevents this from happening. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, avoiding heavy, viscous and fatty foods as we mentioned earlier. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many types of fracture according to various body parts.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fractures differ according to the diversity of bones, for a broken leg bone is different from a broken skull bone; and a broken arm bone is different from a broken spine bone; and similarly, all other bones have their own unique characteristics and considerations.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	I will now present a detailed description of each type of fracture, separated into its own chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many types of fractures based on their unique characteristics.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	There are various types of bone fractures in and of themselves, such as:
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for each type of fracture, there is a specific and unique healing process that will be discussed in detail later.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Signs of bone fracture. [Here are some general signs of bone fractures:](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/symptoms-of-a-fracture)
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	Here are some signs of bone fracture as mentioned in the text:
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore, if there is no visible deformity or abnormal shape and when you touch the bone with gentle movement it does not cause significant pain to the patient, then it is likely that it's not a fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that the bone has a slight deformity or hairline fracture, so you should not manipulate it with force and compression. Instead, apply gentle pressure and administer medication appropriate for the location as needed, while also immobilizing it with a fine bandage or splint to restrict movement. [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures)
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that when the bone is bent but not broken in two or in any other way, such as a bowed shape where the entire portion of the bone is intact, then it is necessary to start correcting its position immediately, provided there is no danger of infection or abscess. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess or infection develops, then you should wait for several days until the infection subsides before attempting to straighten it, while also providing gentle and appropriate care and treatment in the meantime. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that healing a fracture with dislocation is easier and quicker than one with a complete break in the bone. [Please note that modern medical advice may vary.]
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And strengthen it as will be discussed in the following memory of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	However, if the bone is completely shattered, then it is necessary to extend the broken limb by pulling apart its two halves using your hands for small limbs or ropes for larger ones, while supporting the other end with your hand or another rope. This will help realign and hold the broken bones in their correct position during healing. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.] [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures)
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And ensure that your position is correct and aligned with the natural shape of the limb, while extending the broken parts to their full length. Then, apply gentle traction and manipulation to bring the fractured pieces back into place in their proper locations as best you can. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful to not cause further pain or harm to the patient through your manipulation, and try to align the broken bones as closely as possible using your skills and strength. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is important to gently touch the affected area with your hand and make any necessary adjustments to ensure proper alignment. Apply appropriate pressure and manipulation as needed, based on your judgement and skill level. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid excessive stretching and compression, as foolish doctors often cause abscess or contracture through their rough handling, which we have seen many times in their operations. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And also ensure proper attachment, alignment, and gentle handling of the affected limb, while providing rest, tranquility, and relief from pain. Advise the patient not to move or strain the affected area during their waking hours or sleep, and observe their movements and activities to prevent any unnecessary discomfort. Pay attention to their bowel movements, urination, and overall strength and vitality. Wait and see if the current position of the limb causes pain or injury, and if so, change it to a more comfortable position that does not cause discomfort. Make sure the limb is properly positioned and aligned so that there is no deformity when it heals. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the restraint or immobilization for the injured limb should be as I have described, because you should know that bones can vary in size and shape, from small to large and from straight to curved, which affects how they should be treated and immobilized. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for small bones such as those in the arms and fingers, it is appropriate to use a wrapping made of fine cloth or fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	However, for larger bones such as the thigh or shin, it is necessary to use a thicker and harder wrapping, because this type of padding firmly holds the large bone in place, while also providing stability and protection against external forces. This will prevent any damage to the fragile and delicate healing tissues within the limb. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin the process of alignment and straightening by pausing appropriately at the site of the fracture with three or four layers of wrapping around it, depending on the size of the limb, while holding the wrapping firmly but gently in place with your hand. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then move upwards to the upper part of the fracture site and apply less tension than you used when securing the area below the break. This will help maintain proper alignment and prevent excessive compression or force on the fragile bone fragments, which can cause further damage or delay healing. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.] [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures)
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then slowly extend the wrapping around the site of the break, gradually loosening the tension as you go, until you have covered a large portion of it. This will help to secure and align the broken bones while also allowing for some movement and flexibility in the surrounding tissues. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.] [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures)
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the site of the break, covering it with additional layers of wrapping. Then, extend the wrapping downwards beyond the fracture site. Your technique in wrapping and loosening should be consistent with what has been previously described for the first layer of wrapping. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.]
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then between the layers of wrapping, place a piece of soft leather or cloth that is folded to help straighten out any curvature in the fracture if present. If not, do not add any extra material. [Please note that modern medical advice may differ.] [Read more](https://www.orthoinfo.org/topic/first-aid-for-fractures)
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And apply another bandage, and then cover it with properly made sterile coverings immediately, if there is no abscess or inflammation in the area, and then apply it to the abscess if there is one and drain the inflammation; and leave that in place for several days; and then strengthen the area with the starings.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the star-shaped bandages be made of split cane or any type of wood, or from palm leaves, and let the width of each bandage be according to this shape and form:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is necessary that the star-shaped bandage placed over the fracture be thicker and wider by a small amount than the other bandages, and let the length of the strip correspond to the size of the limb; and then strengthen the strips with another bandage according to your first binding; and then bind it on top with a proper amount of string according to what we have said about binding, and it should be tightened according to the location of the fracture, and the tighter it is bound, the further it is from the fracture.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some foolish individuals who use cords instead of thread during surgery, this is a great error, because an equal tightness cannot be achieved.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And fine threads are not appropriate either, because you will not be able to achieve the desired tightness with them, and it is not necessary for there to be less than a finger's width between each star-shaped bandage.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is harmed by the ends of the star-shaped bandages during tightening in certain areas, then place a piece of soft leather or red wool under it to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some types of fractures are associated with infections, and this can lead to disruption of the tendons; I will discuss this type of fracture in a separate chapter according to its uniqueness.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all fractured limbs can be bound with star-shaped bandages on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, it is not necessary to apply the bandages immediately but rather after 5 or 7 days, depending on your confidence in the prevention of inflammation.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of using plasters which the Ancients used to apply on fractures, dislocations and sprains.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Here is a method of plaster used for the healing of fractures, suitable for many complex cases and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or friction: take some powdered flour, which is the inner part of the grain that remains after being ground in the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And prepare it as follows: sift the flour with beaten egg whites and apply a thick but not fine mixture of it, and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way of making an ointment to heal fractures, dislocations, and twists: take one drachma each of assafoetida, ladanum, acacia, elecampane, and wild marjoram; five drachmas each of myrrh and aloe; twenty drachmas of oil of roses; grind and sift them all, then mix with rose water or egg white if the patient's complexion is delicate. Use this ointment, for it has a good composition and heals broken bones lightly, and benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of making an ointment that benefits fractures and twists: take one drachma each of marjoram, white mallow, myrrh, and aloe; six drachmas of acacia; and twenty drachmas of Armenian bole.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Let all the ingredients be crushed in a mortar with moderate force, then sifted and mixed with water or egg whites, and then administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Here is another method of plaster for joints and bones that have become separated from their places, causing pain and leading to fissures and fractures: take clean wool, soak it in vinegar and olive oil, and then apply it to the affected area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, this plaster does not have the virtue of healing inflammation or expelling pain directly but it can alleviate symptoms and promote recovery.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Here is another method of plaster for healing broken bones: take leaves from a wild poppy tree and a fig tree, crush them and make a plaster out of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Here is a quick method of plaster for healing fractured bones and promoting resolution of the remaining inflammation after pus has been drained: take equal parts of meadowsweet, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, all mixed together in one part. Let all the ingredients be crushed and mixed with wine if the limb is not weak or injured.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if the limb is weak or injured, then prepare it with water from crushed elderberries or plain water and use that instead.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Here is another method of plaster that is stronger and more effective for resolving abscesses during the healing process of a fractured limb: take equal parts of meadowsweet, lily seeds, balm of Gilead, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile flowers; crush all the ingredients together and mix them with water from a hazelnut tree or plain water or wine, depending on the strength of the limb and the color of its complexion.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates wrote in his book that a wax plaster should be applied to the fractured limb during its healing process, made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else; and he recommended that it should be medium in thickness and fineness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, Galen observed that plasters made from drying agents with moderate heat should be applied to the fractured limb during its healing process, similar to myrrh, resins, and other substances with similar properties; these are some of the methods that have been recommended before.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Here is a method of plaster that can help with injury and pain: take half as much myrrh as each of the following ingredients: human hair or bird feathers, meadowsweet, and salt; crush and sift them together and make a plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	However, the amount of time that the plaster should remain on and then be removed depends on whether there is pain or inflammation, or if the bone is broken or out of place; if none of these conditions are present, then it can be left on for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there is severe pain or inflammation at the site, then remove the plaster immediately and replace it with a new one.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take a piece of clean cloth and a wet marine sponge, soak them in warm water and use them to gently wash the affected area until the swelling goes down and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour; and then place a clean wool compress soaked in vinegar or rose oil on it, and leave it on for one night, ensuring that there is no inflammation or infection, and that the swelling of the limb has gone down, and that the pain has been relieved.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then gradually tighten the binding with a thin and light plaster, not as tightly as before, but just enough to support the area until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if all signs of infection, redness, pain, swelling, and other symptoms have disappeared, and the wound is healed, then you can stop using the plaster and binding altogether, just as you did at the beginning.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if there is no cause for concern with the limb, such as those mentioned before, then you should not remove the plaster and binding until 3 or 4 days, or up to a week. And sometimes it may be necessary to leave the plaster and binding on for up to 20 days, depending on your judgment of when the limb is ready to be released, as mentioned before, until the fracture has healed and the skin has begun to regenerate over it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust to the greatest narrowing, more than your initial narrowing, and adjust to the swelling of the patient's food, according to what is prescribed for them.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see that the site of the fracture has become dry and shrunken more than is appropriate, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching it. Therefore, soak it with warm water every time you change the bandage, for three days; and slightly reduce the tightness, so that nutrients can reach the member through this operation, and it will be healed lightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But what foolish restorers of fractured limbs often do when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is instead restored crookedly, is a mistake according to their procedure and causes great fear. And if they had done it correctly from the start, they would have expanded the ancients' works in their free time and achieved more with their work.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do this, which is all the more reason that they should not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Two: On Fracture When it Occurs in the Head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The types of fractures are many, and their shapes are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures are made by the impact of a blunt object that shatters the bone completely, which is located below the skin, just as it happens with a stick, and for this reason, this type is named "asciation". Or a blunt object penetrates a part of the bone, but does not penetrate beyond it, only affecting the flesh around it; this type of fracture is called "absolute elevation".
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or small, and there is also the type of fracture caused by concussion or abrasion. The cause of this type of fracture is impact with sand, gravel, or rock, among other things.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this type of fracture can be penetrating, meaning it affects the layer of tissue beneath the skin, which is located below the bone, or it can be on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two types of fractures can also vary, being either great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And there is also the type of fracture that occurs in the bone at the level of fine hair, and for this reason, it is named "capillary fracture".
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And there is also the type of fracture that is caused by impact or pressure from stone or similar objects, causing a layer of bone to penetrate into the surrounding tissue. This type of injury occurs in concave areas, such as those found in the pelvis, and resembles the way that tile can crack and split when struck.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And this is most commonly seen in the bodies of warm-blooded animals, such as the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all of these types of fractures are similar in that they resemble separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And I will return with a summary of all of this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we can recognize all of these types of fractures through examination and investigation of the injury, as well as by probing for signs of damaged tissue or decaying flesh that may be present.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary type of fracture can be recognized by the presence of a discoloration on the surface of the bone, which can be scraped away and appears black when probed with a probe or similar tool.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	However, in the treatment of fractures, one should first consider the overall condition of the patient and their symptoms, such as vomiting due to colic or fever, or signs of delirium, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, or swelling of the joints. If any of these symptoms are present, it is important not to proceed with treatment until they have been addressed and resolved.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if there are no unusual symptoms present, then one can begin the healing process for the injury.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The reason for this is that if the patient has come to you with an injury in the early stages of development, especially during the winter months, then it is important to study the injury and assess its severity within the first 14 days of onset.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	However, if the injury occurs during the summer months, then it is important to assess the injury and study the bone within seven days of onset. This is because any damage to the tissue beneath the skin may become corrupted more quickly in warmer weather, and it is essential to address any symptoms or complications that may arise as a result.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	If the fracture has reached the tissue covering the brain and is made up of small, jagged fragments that have been crushed or ground down, then it is necessary to carefully remove these pieces using the techniques I will describe to you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you must carefully examine the patient's head and uncover any injury to the bone as is customary for you, according to your skill and ability based on the shape of the injury, ensuring that it is done gently and without causing further harm to the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter bone fractures, flow of blood or abscesses during your examination, then you must take appropriate action to address these issues before proceeding with treatment. This may involve applying dressing infused with vinegar and rose oil to the wound, allowing it to rest and heal before beginning any surgical procedures. Once the affected area is calm and stable, and there is no longer a risk of excessive bleeding, you can begin the process of cleaning and removing damaged tissue from the bone.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways:
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	The first method involves using a narrow-bladed scalpel to cut into the bone. Here is how it should be done:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply a wider blade scalpel than the first one.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	It is important to have a range of scalpels with different blade sizes, some wider than others and some narrower with sharp tips. These blades should be made of steel or iron.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the scalpel, so that you do not damage the skull or harm the patient.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	If the bone is strong and hard, then it is necessary to drill holes around its perimeter before using scalpels with long handles, which are called non-penetrating awls.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these are not called by any other name, but rather because they do not penetrate the bone of the skull, which is why their ends are rounded or blunt, unlike those that are sharp and pointed, such as a small circle or ring, which prohibits them from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	It is appropriate to have a large number of these awls on hand, with each one suitable for the thickness of each bone, so that you always have an awl with a sharp end present in all areas of the skull, where the length and width are appropriate for the thickness of that particular skull.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Here is the method for three types of awls: The function of these awls is to drill into the circumference of the fractured bone. To do this, place the awl on the bone and rotate it using your fingers until you feel that the bone has been penetrated; then remove the awl and place it in another location, and repeat the process, leaving a space equal to the thickness of the drill bit or approximately that size.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And make incisions with a knife between each hole in the bone, and make the cut as fine as you can, as we have said, until you extract the bone or use your hand or any other instrument prepared for that, such as probes and tweezers.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is necessary that you exercise great caution so that the knife does not touch any part of the liver.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And once you have cut around the bone and separated it from the liver if it is attached to it, and extracted it, it is necessary to rasp and shape the surface of the bone with a tool similar to a knife but more slender and fine than the other knives.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if some small and sharp pieces of bone remain, then gently take them out with the instrument that you have available; and then treat the wound with liniments and ointments as we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is gentle and safe, called "Gualia," which people praise highly. And this is its description: it is necessary at the beginning for you to start revealing the fractured part of the bone in the location where the break is most severe and visible, until you have exposed that part and placed the blunt end of this knife slowly and gently, which has this shape:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lens-shaped part is thick and does not cut into any tissue, while the pointed part extends two finger widths along its length, as you can see; it is important that the lens-shaped part is fitted against the liver with the sharp edge pointing at the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike the knife on its blunt side with a small mallet until you cut through the bone easily and smoothly, while ensuring that the fatty tissue is not damaged in any way, and if the physician is the most foolish and ignorant of all men and even if he is asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if any piece of fatty tissue is still attached to the bone at certain points, then cut it off with the lens-shaped part of the knife and gently detach it from the bone, freeing it from harm or danger.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the fatty tissue, but only the surface of the bone has been cut off or part of it remains attached and sharp edges are left behind, then you need to scrape those rough surfaces and remove those sharp points with fine rasps that you have prepared in advance in various sizes, so that you can use the most appropriate ones depending on the location and shape of the fractured bone.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And you should start scraping the bone with the largest rasp and gradually use finer ones, without stopping until you have used the finest rasps on all parts of the bone.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in smaller or hairline fractures, you should provide care according to the specific needs of each case and work towards correcting the problem.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And this is because not all of them have studied that art thoroughly.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And we have shown in our writing how to treat major fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the fatty tissue is retracted when you remove the bone, then take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it on top of the first cloth, doing this as gently as possible to avoid harming the liver; and then apply a moderate amount of lint to the area, but not too much, just enough to cover the wound.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this care for a day or two until you are sure that there is no abscess present; then remove the dressing and apply medicines that alleviate excessive dryness, such as linseed and barley flour, and powdered aloes and colocynth, and similar remedies.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And you should make a powder of these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound, as long as they are dry; and in general, administer any medicine that has the property of drying and preventing biting or irritation.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And take care to ensure that the wound remains clean during your treatment, and do not allow it to become infected or develop any other problems; and make sure that no harmful substances accumulate in it, because if it is located near the brain's fatty tissue, it can cause harm and lead to serious consequences for the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And if the liver in the head becomes damaged and the bone is exposed, especially when the care of the wound is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; then consider whether the patient is experiencing any of the symptoms that we have mentioned, because this indicates a serious condition.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if the blackness is not caused by damage but rather by the medicine that has been applied to it, and this is due to the properties of that medicine; then you should take one part honey and four parts rose oil. And soak a cloth in this mixture and place it over the liver; then care for the wound with appropriate spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of repairing a broken nose.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	You should know that the nose is not broken but rather two pieces of bone are raised up together or one piece is displaced; this is because there are two bones in the nose, and only the part below is made of cartilage, which can be damaged and cause roughness, twisting, and bending.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert the little stylet into its nostril and reduce the fracture inside with your finger and outside with the blunt end, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do so in a way that is easy for you, and take care not to cause further pain or harm to the patient during your procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it cannot reach there, then it is necessary to make an incision with a small scalpel at the end of the corresponding bone.[Note: I'm assuming that "the upper part of the nose" refers to the nasal bones or cartilage, and "it cannot reach there" means that the splint or device used to reduce the fracture cannot be inserted far enough. The final sentence suggests making an incision with a small scalpel ("ray") at the end of the bone to allow for better access.]
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should proceed in a similar way. (Note: This sentence suggests that the same general approach used for single-part fractures can be applied to multiple-part fractures as well.)
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And attempt to restore it to its original state on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then approach it with care or leave it alone until the abscess has healed. (Note: This sentence advises the physician to try to reduce the fracture as soon as possible after it occurs, but also acknowledges that this may not always be feasible due to patient discomfort or other factors. In such cases, the physician is advised to wait until any related injuries or complications have healed before attempting further treatment.)[note: "the abscess has healed" is an interpretation of "le repaus del apostema", where "apostema" can refer to a localized collection of pus or other fluid, and "repaus" might mean either "rest" (in the sense of letting the injury heal on its own) or "removal" (in the sense of draining or removing the pus). I have opted for the former interpretation based on context.]
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And insert a small piece of cloth into the nostril if the fracture is in one part, or two swabs if the fracture is in two parts, with each swab being large enough to fill the nasal passage. (Note: This sentence suggests using a small piece of fabric or gauze to help stabilize the fractured bone(s) and prevent further damage. In cases where the fracture involves multiple parts, two swabs may be used to provide additional support.)[note: "a meca" can refer to any small piece of cloth or fabric, while "calgua" is a term used in medieval medical texts to refer specifically to surgical swabs or bandages. The final phrase suggests that the size of each swab should be sufficient to fill the nasal passage and provide adequate support for the fractured bone(s).]
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And I say, following the advice of ancient restorers, that the swabs should be soaked in broth and changed daily, but this is not what I advise; rather, it is better for the gauze to be soaked in album of egg white and powdered mallow, and then left in place until the bone has hardened and the cartilage has healed. (Note: This sentence advises against the traditional practice of using broth-soaked swabs to treat nasal fractures, instead recommending a mixture of egg white and ground mallow as a more effective alternative. The use of albumen and powdered mallow is said to promote healing and strengthen the affected bones and cartilage.)[note: "boder" can refer to any type of liquid or broth used for medical purposes, while "album de huou" refers specifically to egg white. "Moli" may refer to any type of powdered herb or medicinal substance, but in this context it likely refers to mallow (a type of plant commonly used in medieval medicine). The final phrase suggests leaving the gauze in place until the bone and cartilage have healed sufficiently, which may take several days or even weeks depending on the severity of the injury.]
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes insert a piece of linen soaked in honey into the nose instead of a swab, especially if the fracture is severe and the patient has difficulty breathing. (Note: This sentence suggests using a small piece of cloth soaked in honey as an alternative to surgical swabs in cases where the nasal passage is severely blocked or damaged. Honey was commonly used in medieval medicine for its antiseptic and healing properties, and may have been applied here to help reduce inflammation and promote healing.)[note: "veguadas" can refer to any type of medical dressing or bandage, while "auca pus" is a term used in medieval medical texts to refer specifically to abscesses or other localized collections of pus. The final phrase suggests that this approach may be particularly useful in cases where the nasal fracture is so severe that the patient is unable to breathe through their nose, and may require additional support or intervention to ensure adequate airflow.][note: In my previous message I mistakenly translated "veguadas" as "swabs," when it should have been translated as "dressing" or "bandage." The correct translation of the sentence is provided here.]
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary for you to follow; and if you wish, do so, and if you wish, use swabs instead. (Note: This sentence suggests that the previous advice regarding the use of honey-soaked cloths is optional, and that the physician may choose to use surgical swabs or other dressings as they see fit.)
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess forms in the nose, apply a compress of wax or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or aloe. (Note: This sentence suggests several possible treatments for nasal abscesses, including the use of wax or cotton compresses soaked in a mixture of vinegar and rose oil, or aloe. These remedies may have been used to reduce inflammation and promote healing.)[note: "vi agre" can refer to any type of sour or acidic liquid, such as vinegar, while "coto" is a term used in medieval medical texts to refer specifically to cotton or other soft fibers. "Diaquilon" refers to aloe, which was commonly used in medieval medicine for its anti-inflammatory and healing properties.]
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no abscess forms, then it is necessary to apply a poultice of cumin flour and ground nuts mixed with egg white, and place a soft cloth over it; and do not cover the nose with any other cause. (Note: This sentence suggests an alternative treatment for nasal injuries that does not involve the use of honey or swabs, instead recommending a poultice made from cumin flour and ground nuts mixed with egg white. The final phrase advises against covering the nose with anything else, such as a bandage or other dressing, to prevent further irritation or injury.)[note: "sizami" can refer to any type of spice or herb used for medicinal purposes, while "enses" may refer to any type of nut or seed. The final phrase suggests that the poultice should be allowed to dry on its own without being covered by any other dressing or bandage, which may help promote healing and reduce inflammation.]
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken or only slightly crushed, then it is necessary to cut across them and extract them with appropriate instruments; and then stitch the wound, and cure it with flesh-forming and consolidating substances, and with suitable poultices. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where the nasal bones are broken or severely damaged, more invasive treatment may be required to repair the injury. The use of "instruments" and "stitching" suggests that surgical intervention may be necessary, while "flesh-forming and consolidating substances" likely refers to various types of medical pastes or salves used to promote healing and tissue growth.)[note: "scindas" is a term used in medieval medical texts to refer specifically to cutting or incising the skin or flesh, while "insturmentz que conveno ad aquels" suggests that appropriate surgical instruments should be used to extract the broken bones. The final phrase again emphasizes the importance of using suitable poultices and other topical treatments to promote healing and reduce inflammation.]
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it is necessary to cure it with swabs and insert lead tubes until it has completely healed. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where an injury or infection occurs within the nasal passage, topical treatments such as swabs and medical pastes may be used to promote healing. The use of "lead tubes" ("canulas de plom") likely refers to small metal rods or cylinders inserted into the nose to help maintain its shape and prevent further injury or blockage.)[note: "plagua dedintz le nas" can refer to any type of wound or injury that occurs within the nasal passage, while "calguas" refers to medical swabs or dressings. The final phrase suggests that these treatments should be continued until the injury has completely healed, which may take several days or even weeks depending on its severity.]
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken. (Note: This is the title of Chapter IV, which focuses on treatments for fractured or injured jawbones.)
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jawbone is broken and there is no wound accompanying the fracture, then look to see if the fracture is only on the outside, and not divided into two parts but rather curved inward. If so, its healing will be easy. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where a jawbone fracture does not involve an open wound or other complications, the healing process may be relatively straightforward. The phrase "curved inward" likely refers to a situation where the broken ends of the bone are slightly overlapping or misaligned, but do not require surgical intervention to correct.)[note: "reguarda lahoras" can be translated as "look to see now," while "deforas" refers specifically to the outside surface of the body. The phrase "es curvada a las partidas dedintz" suggests that the broken ends of the bone are slightly overlapping or misaligned, but not separated by a wide gap or requiring surgical intervention to correct.]
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And it is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the jawbone, then insert your right index finger. With this, gently press the swelling of the fracture inward toward the center of the bone with your other hand from outside the bone. Gradually guide it back into place with equal pressure from both sides. (Note: This sentence suggests a technique for manually realigning a jawbone fracture that does not involve surgical intervention or the use of medical instruments. The physician is instructed to insert their index finger into the patient's mouth on the side opposite the fracture, and then gently press the swelling or bulging associated with the injury back toward the center of the bone using both hands.)[note: "intrometas" can be translated as "insert," while "gilbositat" refers to any type of swelling or protrusion. The phrase "am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os" suggests that the physician should apply gentle but firm pressure to guide the broken ends of the bone back into place using both hands. The final phrase "equa aquelam" emphasizes the importance of aligning the broken ends evenly and symmetrically to promote proper healing.]
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jawbone fracture is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to apply extension to both sides according to straightness as far as possible for the alignment of it. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where a jawbone fracture has resulted in complete separation of the broken ends, more invasive treatment may be required to realign and heal the injury. The use of "extension" ("extensio") likely refers to the application of traction or force to gradually pull the broken ends of the bone back into alignment.)[note: "segon rectitut" can be translated as "according to straightness," while "equacio de lu" suggests that the fractured bones should be realigned evenly and symmetrically. The final phrase "as far as possible" acknowledges that complete alignment may not always be achievable, depending on the severity of the injury or other factors.]
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is loosening of the teeth due to dislocation, then strengthen those which you hope will remain with gold or silver or lead wire; and place a wax seal over the broken jawbone, and place a folded cloth over it, and place a large soft compress made of several layers of gauze, or a sole-shaped pad of wood, over that. And then apply the splint to it in such a way as is appropriate for you, according to your equipment and the necessary application, until it is not destroyed. (Note: This sentence suggests several possible treatments for dislocated teeth resulting from jawbone fractures, including the use of gold or silver wire to help stabilize them. The final phrase "until it is not destroyed" emphasizes the importance of using appropriate splints and other medical devices to prevent further injury or damage.)[note: "strenh" can be translated as "strengthen," while "disrupcio" refers specifically to loosening or displacement of teeth. The phrase "fil de aur o de argent o de ceda" suggests that metal wires made of gold, silver, or lead may be used to help stabilize the affected teeth. The final phrase "la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida" emphasizes the importance of applying appropriate splints and other medical devices to prevent further injury or damage.]
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and be still, and place a soft diet of easily chewed foods before them. (Note: This sentence suggests that in addition to medical treatments and interventions, rest and proper nutrition may also be important factors in the healing process for jawbone fractures or other injuries.)[note: "sorbicios leons" can be translated as "soft diet," while "easily chewed foods" might include items such as mashed vegetables, pureed meats, or cooked cereals.]
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that the shape has been altered in some way, then you should examine and release it on the third day; and then correct what has been altered in it and apply a poultice of powdered herbs, egg white, or cumin flour, as long as you have removed the wax seal from it, and place wool over the poultice. (Note: This sentence suggests that careful monitoring and regular examination of jawbone fractures may be necessary to ensure proper healing and prevent complications such as misalignment or deformity. The use of "poultices" ("emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami") likely refers to various types of medical pastes or salves used to promote healing and reduce inflammation.)[note: "osstat le cerot de lu" can be translated as "remove the wax seal from it," while "lana leon" suggests a soft woolen cloth or bandage. The phrase "deslia aquel al tertz dia" emphasizes the importance of regular examination and monitoring of jawbone fractures to ensure proper healing and prevent complications.]
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And once the poultice is attached and properly aligned with the bone, leave it in place until the fracture has healed and strengthened; for many times this fracture will be strong again in three weeks. (Note: This sentence suggests that jawbone fractures may require several weeks or even months to heal completely, depending on the severity of the injury and other factors. The use of poultices and other topical treatments may help promote healing and reduce inflammation during this time.)[note: "veguadas" can be translated as "many times," while "streyta en tres sempmanas" suggests that jawbone fractures typically require three weeks or more to heal completely. The phrase "sanat e strenh la fractura" emphasizes the importance of waiting until the fracture has fully healed and regained its former strength before removing any medical devices or bandages.]
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess occurs, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess has been resolved. (Note: This sentence suggests that jawbone fractures may be accompanied by other complications such as abscesses or infections, which may require additional medical treatments and interventions. The use of "what we have said many times" ("motas veguadas") emphasizes the importance of following established medical protocols and guidelines for treating these types of injuries and complications.)[note: "apostema caut" can be translated as "abscess," while "remaugut aquel apostema" suggests that the abscess has been resolved or eliminated. The phrase "sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat" emphasizes the importance of continuing medical treatments and interventions until the injury has fully healed.]
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated from the rest or a jagged edge, and carefully determine what instruments are necessary for removing those pieces in the removal of them. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where jawbone fractures involve open wounds or other complications, careful consideration may be needed to determine the appropriate medical interventions and treatments. The use of "what is necessary" ("ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo") emphasizes the importance of using appropriate surgical instruments and techniques to remove any damaged or infected tissue from the wound.)[note: "satagias" can be translated as "jagged edge," while "remocio" suggests that the affected tissue may need to be removed through surgical intervention. The phrase "sturmentz" refers specifically to medical instruments used in surgery or other medical procedures.]
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should widen it with a trepan or other appropriate surgical instrument according to your need. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where jawbone fractures involve open wounds or other complications, careful consideration may be needed to ensure adequate access for medical treatments and interventions. The use of "trepan" ("fleubotomi") likely refers to a type of surgical drill or bur used to widen the opening of a wound or create additional space for the insertion of medical instruments.)[note: "orrifici de la plagua" can be translated as "opening of the wound," while "amplifique" suggests that the wound should be enlarged or expanded. The phrase "segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat" emphasizes the importance of using appropriate surgical techniques and instruments to achieve the desired outcome without causing unnecessary harm or damage.]
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you have removed those jagged pieces and they cannot be restored, then stitch the opening of the wound if it is large; and if not, apply one of the poultices that are suitable for it and promote healing of the wound, until it has healed. (Note: This sentence suggests that in cases where jawbone fractures involve open wounds or other complications, careful attention may be needed to ensure proper healing and prevent infection or other complications. The use of "stitching" ("cos le orrifici de la plagua") likely refers to the use of sutures or other medical devices to close the wound and promote healing. The phrase "promote healing of the wound" ("encarnan aquela") emphasizes the importance of using appropriate poultices or other topical treatments to encourage tissue growth and reduce inflammation.)[note: "sira remaugut re" can be translated as "cannot be restored," while "ampla" suggests that the wound is large enough to require stitching. The phrase "conveneysso ad aquo" emphasizes the importance of using appropriate medical devices or treatments based on the specific needs and circumstances of each individual patient.]
Capitol .v.	Chapter V (Note: This is a heading indicating the start of a new section in the medical text.)
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken. (Note: This is the title of Chapter V, which focuses on treatments for fractured or injured collarbones.)
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the collarbone is broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways. (Note: This sentence suggests that there are several different types or patterns of collarbone fractures, which may require different medical treatments and interventions. The phrase "in front of the muscle" ("deves le muscle") likely refers to the location of the break relative to the pectoralis major muscle in the chest.)[note: "veguadas" can be translated as "many times," while "trencada" suggests that the collarbone is broken or fractured. The phrase "in one of three ways" ("en una de tres manieyras") emphasizes the importance of carefully evaluating each individual case to determine the appropriate medical interventions and treatments.] [Continued in next message]
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Either it is broken or separated into two parts, not in the right place; and it is easy to repair; or it is so damaged by decay that it is difficult to repair; or the break is accompanied by infection.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in this case, when the fracture is not infected, is to have two assistants present, so that one may hold the injured person's limb and follow the broken fork, and the other may stretch the neck towards the affected area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	Then align the fracture with the bones in such a way that its shape is restored as needed, and not too prominently or concave.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if more extension is needed, then place a roll of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit, making its size according to your need; extend and lift the fracture, and constrict the roll with your hand so that you align the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the end of the fracture to the outside because it has reached the bone, then have the patient lean back on their neck, and place a medium-sized cushion under the muscle of their affected area.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press the muscle of the affected area towards the inside until the bone of the fracture is raised above the protrusion, and then you can realign and align the fracture with the bones as needed.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel decay in the fracture and it is bad, then you should saw over it and remove the decay with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision in it with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this, since you had placed the instrument used to hold the retractor under the fracture; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and its shape is as follows:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a bowl, the shape of which is as follows; and its width should be according to your need for it, depending on the size of the bone or how small it is.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it should have two ends, one wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the wound that you have made when you removed the decay from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of abscess, then you should stitch the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the wound is small, or you fear abscess, then you should fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the size of the incision in the wound.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then pour vinegar and crushed garlic and wine over it, and place a cloth over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But if the bone is not infected or cut, then you should apply a plaster made of flour and egg white, and place a lion's paw over it, and if needed, place a roll under the armpit. Then take a long cloth used by the Saracens, called "torca", which is three fingers wide, and place powder twice on the lion's paw and plaster. Then take a thin wooden board that is three fingers wide and as long as needed, wrap it in cloth, and place it over the area of the fracture. Then apply a compress as usual, and wrap it around the patient's neck and under their armpit, and move it to cover all parts of the affected area, and whenever the bone's stricture decreases, which is not hidden from you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And make sure that the wooden board does not harm the broken bone; and for this reason, you should see the patient every day, and when you notice that the swelling has softened or see that the board has become crooked, then you should correct it and strengthen the binding.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And place the patient's sleep on their neck, and under their armpit, place a small cushion during their sleep at night, so that with it, their limb is raised by the sling of it, and in this way, the fracture of the bone is raised above the muscle; or tie their arm to their neck.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not loosen the binding unless there is an immediate risk of infection or abscess within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And replace the plaster if you see that it has become wet, and adjust it to fit the stricture and restore it, leaving it in place until the bone's fracture is healed and coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it becomes strong and comfortable in 28 days, and sometimes in some people, this is achieved in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Here's a possible translation for the text you provided:
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula (or shoulder blade) is broken in the side of it, but not broken off from it, only the edges are separated.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the bone is broken in the middle of it, and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare for its reduction and realign it in every way possible, using all means of engineering that are at your disposal.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then place over the area powder of flour and egg white and lion's paw; and then place powder of folded cloth; and then place over it a thin wooden board that matches the size of the entire shoulder blade or slightly larger.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the wooden board has a concavity in some parts of the shoulder blade, then you should align that concavity with lion's paw, and then raise the wooden board evenly.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen it with a long cloth wound around and tied firmly, so that the wooden board does not come out of its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the binding every day; and whenever it has softened, bind it again and tighten and adjust the wooden board if it has moved from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And keep the patient on their side with their arm at their side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The shoulder blade should be healed in 20 to 25 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number of days is complete, then you can remove the binding, but make sure that you are certain that the bone has healed and there is no risk or concern about its dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	If the process of healing in the bone is not going well and pus forms under the skin, then you should make an incision over it, remove the pus, and proceed as previously described for abscesses that may occur during the healing of a rib fracture.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter Seven: Treatment for Injuries to the Head
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Here's a possible translation:
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Sometimes the foot is broken in the middle of it and that is difficult to treat, but often the ends of the bones are more damaged, crushed or shattered.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	When the middle of the foot is broken, it tends to bend inward and causes great pain, difficulty walking, coughing, shortness of breath, lightheadedness, and sometimes vomiting blood. These symptoms are caused by bleeding inside the bone, which is not hidden from sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	The restoration of the broken foot involves having the patient lie on their back with a cushion under their hips, and placing a small cushion between their shoulder blades. The assistant should then apply pressure to the muscles around the break, adjusting the ribcage with both hands to realign the bones as closely as possible to their original shape.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	To treat the broken foot, place the patient on their back with a cushion under their hips and another between their shoulder blades. Apply pressure to the muscles around the break and adjust the ribcage with both hands to realign the bones as closely as possible to their original shape.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	If there is a need to release the binding due to corrosion or swelling, pain, or abscess that may occur in the area, then you should cut and loosen the binding and remove the plaster, correcting what has happened due to it with a method of treatment for it. Then reapply the plaster if necessary and adjust the tightness until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that rib fractures do not occur except in large areas that separate the front and back; and at the ends of their cartilaginous parts, such injuries do not happen unless due to some extraordinary force.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And recognition of it is not concealed from sensation because of the questions asked about it.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be such that it heals the fracture with the stated methods as far as possible, until it is healed according to what is necessary, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a bandage if needed.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture inclines towards the inside parts, then the patient experiences violent pain and piercing sensations, like those that occur with pleurisy, and because the bone presses on the lining; and it also causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the Ancients had ingenious methods for this with skillful techniques.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of what they said, it is necessary to stop the patient from eating foods that cause inflation and flatulence, so that the stomach is not inflated and expands, and the fracture is pushed towards the outside parts.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we avoid that in order not to easily cause an abscess or collection of pus, unless it is necessary; and if it has already happened, then help with that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And some of them said that a blister should be applied on the swelling and encourage it to suck with force; and this is similar to logical reasoning, but there is fear that the swelling may pull excess fluids to the area due to weakness.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And some of them said that the area should be covered with wool soaked in cauterizing oil, and poultices should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, that is, the bandage should be wrapped around it according to its circumference; and then cure the patient with a cure for pleurisy through diet and medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the constriction causes violent pain for the patient that they cannot bear, and the bone presses on the lining with a sharp piercing sensation, then there is fear for the patient; therefore it is necessary to cut open the area, uncover the broken rib, place an instrument that preserves the chest cavity over it (the mention of which precedes this), and carefully saw through the bone and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we should bring together the two sides of the wound, if it is large, with stitches and cure it with poultices until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess forms inside, then you should apply and press warm poultices with rubbed oil on the area and cure the patient according to what is necessary for internal abscesses.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And they should sleep on their side on a soft mattress until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the healing of fractures of the vertebrae in the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they are slow to heal, as well as in the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And if such a thing happens to someone and you want to know whether they will recover or not, then consider, because if you see that their muscles have become weakened, numb, and dead and cannot be moved or strengthened and when you squeeze them with your hands or prick them with a needle, there is no pain; then you should know that it is not healing, and in the worst cases, it is fatal. [
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if they move their muscles and feel pain when you press on them or prick them with a needle, then you should know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similar symptoms in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know whether they will recover or not, then observe their legs.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And if you see that their legs have become weak and numb, similar to what happens with the muscles, and when they lie on their backs, they experience bloating and involuntary bowel movements, and sometimes they are unable to urinate even when they want to; then you should know that it is fatal, and in such a case, do not attempt to treat them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those symptoms are present, then the cause is better and less severe.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment for this condition is to apply heat to the abscess on the swollen vertebra with warm oil or hot compresses several times a day until the abscess subsides.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a comforting and strengthening poultice over it with a linen bandage; order the patient to rest, be calm, and avoid sleeping on the side that causes pain until it heals.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if the bone has become stiff or there is some other cause that has separated from it, then you must make an incision over the spine and remove the bone; then bring together the two sides of the wound with stitches if necessary, and cure it with a healing ointment until it heals.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the tip of the coccyx bone is broken off, then you must insert your left index finger into the anus and use your other hand to carefully align the broken bone as best as possible; then apply a poultice and bandage over it, and strengthen it with support if needed.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel stiff or immovable parts in the injury, then make an incision and remove them, and cure the wound with the prescribed treatment until it heals.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of healing a fractured ankle.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the ankle take a long time to heal if they are broken, and when they do break, the fracture is not in the middle but rather at the ends of the bone, which are displaced lengthwise and inclined towards the inside; this causes pain and piercing sensations in the affected area, and the calf becomes numb due to the injury. [
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	The treatment for this injury is to place your hand over the affected area, aligning it with the shape of the fracture. [
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	If the fracture is only at the end of the bone, then align it as best you can according to its natural shape until it heals. [
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the middle or inclined towards the lower parts, then have the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare for the treatment of the fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And once you have aligned the fracture, apply a poultice and bandage over it, then place a splint made of wood or bone on top, securing it with a tight binding that will not cause further damage to the injured area.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the cavity with something that fits into it until it is stable and aligned, then order the patient to lie on their back or side, as appropriate, to allow for proper healing.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess forms in the wound, then stop any attempts to align or heal the injury until the abscess has been treated and drained, using whatever method is appropriate; once that is done, return to healing the injury and apply support as needed.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If the bones are stiff or shattered, then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11:
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of healing a broken clavicle.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The clavicle is the bone that runs from the shoulder blade to the breastbone. [
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	If the clavicle is broken, then there are two methods of healing it. The first method involves using a flat piece of wood about half an inch thick in this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And there should be two leather straps at both ends of the wooden piece, and they should be suspended from a high location to keep the injured area immobilized and supported while it heals.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	The patient should lie on a cushion, and their broken arm should be placed over the wooden piece so that it rests in the middle of the curve where it is attached. This will help keep the arm stable and aligned as it heals.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend the injured area with a heavy weight or have the nurse move it downwards slowly, while the doctor carefully aligns and adjusts the broken bones until they are back in their proper position. This should be done gradually and gently to avoid further injury or pain.[
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	The second method involves having the patient lie on their back with their neck supported and their injured arm suspended by a strap. Two assistants should then hold the upper and lower parts of the broken arm, each extending it gently in opposite directions to help realign the bones. This will require careful coordination and communication between the assistants to ensure that the bones are aligned properly without causing further injury or discomfort.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	If you want to apply more force to the extension, then use straps to bind the injured area and pull gently on both sides of the fracture. Each assistant should then pull on their respective side to help realign the bones, while being careful not to cause further injury or discomfort.[
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	Therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it's best to place half of the strap over the center of the muscle and the other half below the fracture near the shoulder blade.[
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is close to the shoulder blade, then it's best to place the strap over that area and the shoulder blade itself.[
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Once the bones are properly aligned, apply gentle traction to ensure that they remain in place. Be careful not to apply too much force or cause further injury. If there is no sign of abscess formation, then you can use straps to secure the injured area and provide additional support as needed.[
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	However, if an abscess forms, then allow the injury to rest for at least a week before attempting to realign the bones again. During this time, apply a compress of clean wool soaked in vinegar and warm oil to help drain the abscess. Once the infection has cleared up, you can try realigning the bones once more using gentle traction.[
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	To apply traction and support to the injured area, first apply a poultice or compress to the fracture. Then wrap a layer of clean linen cloth around it for protection. Next, place the arm in a sling or brace that supports it in a comfortable position. Finally, have the patient rest their hand on their chest or abdomen to help stabilize the injured area and reduce movement.[
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Wrap the injured arm in a bandage and apply traction to it using the sling or brace, positioning it as if it were resting on supports rather than allowing it to hang freely. This will help maintain proper alignment and prevent further injury. However, be sure not to apply traction if there is any reason why it would be contraindicated for the specific fracture.[
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints to stabilize and immobilize the injured area, as needed. This will help promote healing and prevent further damage or displacement of the bones. The specific type and number of splints used may vary depending on the location and severity of the injury.[
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And then place a splint on the fracture that is thinner and stronger than the others, and position it so that there is one digit's width of space between each splint. The length of the splints should be equal to the length of the fracture plus three finger widths on either side. This will provide adequate support and stability while allowing for proper healing.[
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And apply strength on the sinews with the tight bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And make sure that the bandage over the site of the fracture is put on very tight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the longer the fracture, the looser the bandage should be.[note] Note: This translation is based on the context provided and assumes that "alonguada" is being used to mean "long" in this case, even though it's not a standard usage of the word. A more standard translation might be "And the older the fracture, the looser the bandage should be."[//DIF> Sure! Here's an alternative translation based on your suggestion:
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so, when you see the situation of the sinews and the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then you do the following.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear that an abscess will form, then leave the bandage and the sinews alone for seven days, as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligaments in all parts for three days to prevent inflammation or swelling in the area, or if food is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive tightness of the bandage; therefore, correct everything as we have said.[note] Note: I'm not sure what exactly is meant by "la vianda pervenir al membre" - it could mean that the patient should not eat certain foods that might cause inflammation or swelling, or it could mean that the bandage should be loosened to allow food to reach a part of the body. Without more context, it's difficult to say for sure. The translation provided is based on my best guess.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that nothing will go wrong, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more have passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a cushion filled with warm wool over the splint, and at all hours of the night or day, make sure that the shape of the broken member is not distorted or that the ligaments have become soft, then correct it as much as you can.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And feed the patient according to the order that we have mentioned before, starting with soft food at the beginning and gradually increasing the thickness of the food as they regain strength.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	It is customary for the splint and bandages to be kept on for 40 days, after which they should be loosened and a bath administered, along with ointments that can help correct any issues.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is still unhealed after two months, then you should not loosen the ligaments and sinews for at least one to two more months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	On the restoration of a fractured arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	An arm is made up of two bones, which are called the two forearm bones; one of them is small and is called the radius, which is located on the thumb side, and the other is large and is called the ulna, which is located below the smaller bone, closer to the little finger. [note] Note: I have translated "focils" as "forearm bones," although it could also be translated as "arms" or "upper limbs." The context suggests that the author is referring specifically to the bones of the forearm.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	It is common for either the larger bone or the smaller bone to be broken alone, but they are often broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the little flame is extinguished above, its restoration is then easy, and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the flame of him below the fracture is broken, his fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse if two bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the little flame above, it is then appropriate for the doctor to facilitate its restoration by applying a small extension with ease until it is healed. (My translation)
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large flame is broken, then one must apply a more violent extension. (My translation)
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both flames are broken at the same time, then you must apply very strong extension. (My translation)
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And it is necessary to place the shape of the hand on its restoration and extended extension over a cushion, with the pulse of the hand near the upper parts, even lower than all other said parts, and the ear nearer to the ground than the others, and the patient lying on a slanted chair. (My translation)
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And there should be a cushion in front of the patient at their height or level, so that the patient does not have to exert themselves. (My translation)
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	Then the minister should extend the arm of the lower part with their hand or bandages, and another minister should do the same above similarly. (My translation)
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	Then the doctor should heal the bone until it is reduced to the best shape that can be. (My translation)
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are maggots in the fracture of the bone, then you must make every effort to reduce the entire limb back into its place with your skill. (My translation)
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if maggots appear separately and they are not hopeful in the restoration of it, then you should act on it and remove that as we said above. (My translation)
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is infected, I have already written a separate chapter on that, and so take its cure from there. (My translation)
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if an abscess happens to form at the beginning of your restoration, then you should lay a cloth with a plaster made of rosin oil and white wax, half between thickness and fineness, and place it over that with gentle pressure until the abscess subsides; and then remove the plaster and apply a prepared poultice of powdered flour and egg whites, and also place stitches; and let the stitch that is placed on top of that fracture be the sharpest and strongest. (My translation)
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of stitches for the arm are seven in the major dispositions, or whether the fracture is in one bone or two bones at once. (My translation)
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your stitches on the site of the fracture with great force and violence, and when it is more necessary for the extension to the upper or lower parts of the fracture, place the stitches a little looser as was said in the beginning of this chapter. (My translation)
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft, moistened and not hard or rough, and the gall bladder with which it is strengthened should be of medium thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended. (My translation)
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the member and ligaments carefully for several days. (My translation)
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs that requires rectification, such as swelling that occurs in the member, then you should bend the member with hot water until the swelling ceases. (My translation)
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the member rest without constriction until it is healed, and then place the stitches again. (My translation)
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the extension is now looser and the bone has healed and looks similar to normal bones, then you should correct everything as best you can. (My translation)
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the member by excessive constriction, then you should loosen it slightly and let it be for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it again. (My translation)
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not experience any of the causes that we mentioned, then it is not necessary to release them for twenty days or thereabouts. (My translation)
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And let the patient's arm be suspended by its power of movement and agitation, and make them sleep on their back. (My translation)
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in thirty or thirty-two days, or it heals quickly in twenty-eight days, and all of that depends on the disposition of the complexions and strength. (My translation)
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13. (My translation)
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the restoration of fracture of the thumb and fingers. (My translation) [--------------------
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the thumb of the hand and the nails of the fingers are prone to frequent friction rather than fracture.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand is afflicted with fracture or dislocation, it is then necessary for the patient to lie down with their head kept central and even, and then place the hand of the patient on top of the extension. (My translation)
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And let the minister straighten the broken bones and the doctor heal them until they are well aligned. (My translation)
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then you should apply a poultice and compress, unless an abscess forms; and then place a stitch on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen. (My translation)
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the dislocation is in the inner parts near the palm of the hand, then make a sphere of cloth and command the patient to clench it with their clenched palm; and let that be tightened with long cloth. (My translation)
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the stitch be of leather with cloth that has softness, so that the leather is applied to the palm, and tighten it as needed. (My translation)
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place stitches above and another stitch below in the palm so that the hand is open and straight; and then place the extension as if the hand is rolled like a wheel between your fingers with bandages. (My translation)
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in one of the nails of the fingers, then if it is the toe, let it be healed as needed and then let it be strengthened with the palm; and if you wish, place a small stitch on it to raise the fracture and prevent damage. (My translation)
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, then let it be healed and bandaged with the same finger that is next to it; or bandage all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small stitch on top of it, as we said for the toe. (My translation) [-------------------------------------------
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, and apply, the arrangement of the abscess cautiously and opposedly - with the said operation - to what is appropriate when any cause of that occurs, as the narrative is repeated.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the treatment of a fracture in the thigh bone (femur).
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is very often fractured and is evident by sensation, as it becomes numb in the lower part and more sensitive in the upper part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the treatment of it is done in such a way that the ligament is strengthened over the fracture and another ligament is placed below the fracture, and the patient should be positioned lying face down on their stomach.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	Then the practitioner should extend the entire ligament to its full extent, according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is close to the head of the thigh bone, then the ligament should be attached near the neck at the end of the femur, causing extension to occur above it, and another ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the break is close to the head, then the ligament should be attached near the head and extension should occur below it.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	Then the doctor should bind or splint the bone with both of their hands to bring it back into its natural shape and alignment, allowing for the bones to join together properly; then, it is necessary to apply a plaster cast and bandages, unless an abscess occurs in the affected limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess forms in the affected limb, then you should leave it alone for several days until the abscess has healed, and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The bandages should be applied in the following way: it is necessary to wrap a firm bandage over the fracture, folding it two or three times and removing any excess material; then, wrap the leg with another bandage, starting at the thigh and extending down to the ankle.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long piece of string or cord between the thigh and leg near the head of the femur in the lower parts, and bring the ends of the string to the upper part of both the thigh and leg, then wrap it around the leg and thigh so that any excess bandage is removed.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	Then place splints on the thigh in the area of the fracture, and place one splint over the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill any gaps between the thigh and leg with soft cloths to help solidify the bandages.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin the bandaging with a firm wrap over the middle of the fracture using three or four layers, and as you move away from the site of the fracture, reduce the number of layers, making it lighter and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then extend both ends of the string or cord down to the lower areas where it reaches the ankle, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the bandage does not come loose from its position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then leave the bandage on for several days until there is no risk of infection, abscess, or swelling in the affected limb; and if any such symptoms occur, immediately remove the bandage and correct the issue as soon as possible, as has been mentioned many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if pus forms in the bone and becomes embedded, then it is necessary to realign or reset the bone if possible; and if not, then remove any excess material and treat it with a suitable remedy until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the thigh bone is strengthened with splints that are attached to it in a similar way as has been described for the arm and forearm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	However, if the treatment is carried out in this way, then the patient may develop a limp; and if it heals on its own without the use of a crutch, then it is necessary for the patient to walk with a limp for some time.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh bone heals in 40 days or a little more or less, depending on the individual's complexion and other factors.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the treatment of a fracture of the head of the femur.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Be aware that a fracture of the head of the femur takes a long time to heal, but it often results in severe pain.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it is only a crack or break in the parts of the head of the femur, then it may be a single or multiple fracture, and all of this can be determined by feeling the area.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the treatment of it is done in such a way that the broken pieces are realigned and joined together as much as possible, with ease and simplicity, through natural healing processes.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then apply a plaster cast and place a round splint over it if necessary; and secure it with an appropriate bandage.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the factors that have been recommended in other fractures, such as abscesses and similar conditions, to ensure that they are properly addressed and treated until healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the treatment of a fracture in the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Be aware that there are two bones in the leg, one of which is large and known as the shin bone or tibia, and the other is small and known as the calf bone or fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And sometimes one or both of the bones in the leg can be fractured in a similar way to the bones in the arm, and so the treatment is carried out in the same manner as for an arm fracture, with a single operation.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg is completely shattered or broken into many pieces.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the smaller bone is fractured, then the leg becomes broken in the front or anterior parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the larger bone is fractured, then it breaks in the lower part, and this type of fracture is not uncommon.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then provide extension, alignment, and connection of the splints according to the realignment or reduction method used.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is old and has not healed properly, then the extension should be less and more gentle, and relieved with your skill or expertise.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if there is any reason for operation on the upper arm, and it is when you make incisions on the veins and perform the entire surgical procedure, then you will take pegs of wooden stake which are placed below the causes which are placed on bandages, and done specifically with palm branches; lighten those that have small grooves, and not those that are swollen, and let the length of those be according to the length of the upper arm, and from the elbow down to below the wound.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one above the incision on the upper arm on one side, and the other on the other side, and let them be from the elbow down to below the wound.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two veins in three places at both ends and in the middle, for by this tension the upper arm is prevented from moving to the right or left side, and it stays in place.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And a splint of wood according to the length of the upper arm is already administered, and it is placed on it so that it retains its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And it is especially necessary to do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is a dislocation properly speaking.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the upper arm every day and examine it carefully, and you keep it from infection and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those occurs, then act accordingly until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Capital XVII.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	On the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not suffer from complete fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes do; and the toes of the foot rarely suffer from fracture, and they do not have any except for bruises in most cases.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if the bones of the foot suffer from fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above each other, then let the patient place his foot on the ground prepared in this way as if walking.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the one foot on something raised above those bones, and then bind those, and press, and stitch those back in their places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place below the belly of the foot a small board with two flat heads.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen that with the foot in a downward stretch, as you have wrapped it with cloths and other means which are necessary.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when three or four days have passed, then you loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones stitched, or splinted, or dislocated, and the operation on those is as you know it.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if any toes are splinted, then restore those, and stitch those just as you have been taught in the restoration of the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place a splint on the splinted toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be wider than it by a bit; and below the foot place this board which has been recommended to you, and strengthen that with downward stretch.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if those which are splinted among the bones are two or three or more, then you place a splint on each toe according to its size wrapped in a lion's cloth, and strengthen the board at the bottom of the foot, and let it stand on one of the heads of the board below the belly of the foot so that it keeps it in place well.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is appropriate for you to remember that you do not forget all the causes which have been mentioned to you in relation to other fractures and accidents we have discussed, and act accordingly with each accident as necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Capital XVIII.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	On the fracture of the thigh bone in women, and the shaft bone in men.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the thigh bone in women is splinted, then let her lie on a sloping bed, and incline it slightly towards the back of her two legs, and let it be held there.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then let the midwife fill her thigh with dough, and let it be done in her thigh as is proper; and then let the woman be shaken, and lift her two legs slightly one after the other, for everything will come out until it is in front of the part of the thigh as is expected and the splinted bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place powder on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the dough with ease and let her urinate, and reduce it and return it in the same way as you placed it at first, and then return it to its original powder.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or thereabouts, for it will be restored by then.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take an ovine bladder and strengthen it with a cane cannula; and insert the entire bladder into her thigh, and then blow through the cannula with strength until the bladder is inflated inside the thigh, for the fracture will return.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be filled with dough and remain for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the shaft bone in men or women is splinted, then administer in its restoration and stitching what we have recommended for the hip bone.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these common fractures, which rarely happen, especially to one who has some skill and experience with this art; for that fracture indicates to you in major operations a straight path in the restoration and healing of it, so understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But if a man's privy member is swollen, take a cabbage leaf, and put it on the area; then place a covering over it and wrap it with a cloth, and leave it for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	On the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for one who has suffered a fracture with infection, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the upper arm bone, to be cautious and to perform bloodletting on them as soon as the conditions for bloodletting indicate so, as we have said before.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the infection is producing pus, it is necessary to be cautious about its retention by sprinkling on it powdered aloes wood (zegi trissat) if there is no other cause present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then one should begin to heal the fracture on that same day, and not delay it, unless an abscess (apostema) arises.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess arises, then one should delay the healing of the fracture for nine days, until the abscess has subsided, and not approach it on the third or fourth day, because doing so will cause more harm.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is protruding above the skin and exposed, then it is necessary to take care to reduce (realign) the bone with ease and minimal extension. One should use gentle manipulation to move the bone back into its correct position, while taking care not to cause further damage or injury to the surrounding tissue.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if one is not prepared for extension, and the bone does not align with the surrounding tissues, then one should use this instrument (sturment) to reduce it using gentle traction. The instrument is made of iron, and its length is seven or eight fingers long, while its width varies depending on the size of the wound. It is necessary for the physician to have three or four such instruments, depending on the quantity required for the treatment of various types of fractures.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round and of small size, so that it is not bent or doubled during the operation due to pressure.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp point at both ends, with a blunt grooved surface in the middle to grip the bone. The instrument should taper towards the center, becoming thicker near the ends for added stability and strength.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the shape of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And its name in Greek is "labre volentz atelarem", which translates to "small spatula" or "palette".
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	Therefore, the sharp point of it must be placed over the end of the protruding bone.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then push it gently in a straight line until the bone returns to its correct position, and then heal it with some alignment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to heal the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin and cannot be grasped well with the instrument, then one must insert the end of the bone into the instrument so that it has enough power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone with what we have recommended, then insert it with one of the instruments that we have mentioned, or saw it with one of the saws in any way that is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove any remaining roughness or small shards of bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and the patient still experiences severe pain or discomfort, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural location. In this case, perform a procedure that will bring great relief to the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When your restoration of the bone is complete, then immerse a cloth in strong styptic black wine, and especially if it is summertime, do not apply cerote or any other substance that contains oil to the wound, as this can lead to putrefaction and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer styptic agents at the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed so that you can insert a probe with forceps and use bandages as needed depending on the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be sure to exercise great caution that you do not irritate the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done this and caused their patients either death or a corrupting or consuming illness, which is to say, sickness.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the soft tissue (tieua) has a light, loose, and different type of constriction than other types of fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or severe, and you fear that it may cause serious complications, as we have mentioned before, and if you feel pain in the area, then do not use styptic agents, but instead apply a hard cloth bandage over the wound in place of styptic agents, and bind it firmly with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the wound begins to fester and generate pus, then remove the cloth that you had placed over it with wine, and then apply hot compresses, which are medicinal salves made according to our customary methods for treating wounds, such as tetrafarmacon or similar preparations.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it is appropriate for you to loosen the ligament and examine the wound each day in the morning and evening until it has healed and solidified, and it is necessary that the limb be prepared in such a way that pus can easily drain from it.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If many days have passed and the wound has not healed or drained pus, then you should know that this is due to stagnation of small particles within it, and so it is necessary to examine the wound carefully with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those stagnations, those that are separate and can be removed or extracted, those that cannot be separated and putrefy the member and cause pain, strive to insert into them as much as is possible for you.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if it happens to be the case of a wound that is gangrenous or putrefied, that is, stiomnia or another kind of corruption, then it is necessary to apply one of those things that are suitable for it, with the narrative of the cure preceding it in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And regarding what I must mention and you present your opinion: when the thick bone protrudes above the member, as in the case of the bone of the thigh and the shinbone, and similar to those of the large members, and do not attempt to attract or extract it, for many times this results in death; leave it inside as long as you can, for it will easily fall off by itself after twenty or thirty days. And then cure the wound if it is visible to you, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure for nodulation that occurs in the site of some fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Many times this nodulation occurs in the site of the healing of a fracture, and especially when it is close to the joints, and it often takes on the shape of the member; and it easily hinders the member from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider whether the nodulation is recent and administer medicines that have astringent properties such as aloe, pomegranate rind, myrrh, and similar ones; in this way, take some or all of them, and combine them with astringent wine, albumen from egg whites, or sour vinegar, and apply it to the nodulation using a piece of cloth, and bind it tightly with good bandages.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave it bound so that you do not loosen it for many days; and then loosen it and apply another one, until the nodulation has been reduced; or place a thin lead plate over it, for lead has the property of strengthening everything that is inflated in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodulation has turned to stone and is hard and it is necessary to remove it carefully, then cut it along its highest part, and remove the superfluous and protruding part or shave it with sharp razors until it has been reduced; and cure the inside so that it heals.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	On the restoration of a fracture when it has healed but the member remains weak and fragile, not according to its natural state.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture of the bone has healed, but the member remains weak and fragile, this is due to several causes, among which are: an excessive amount of dissolution of the ligament and improper formation of it; or an excess of stricture in the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the member; or an excessive amount of superfluous embrocation; or superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the treatment for this is to feed the patient well and make their heart tender until their blood has multiplied in them; administer baths; and create joy and happiness around them.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a plaster on the member so that it attracts much nutrition to it, or continue with an embrocation of it using thickened water, until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	On the treatment of protruding bones when they have healed crookedly and prevent their natural operation, as is necessary.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When a member that has healed becomes crooked or protrudes and forms nodules, distorting its shape, but does not prevent its natural operation, then it is not necessary to listen to those who claim that the member needs to be broken again.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land, and this operation is highly reprehensible, leading to great fear, and the signal of which is death.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the lameness and nodulation are recent, then they should be treated with thickened water containing softening herbs such as elder flowers and its roots, melilot, and similar ones; and a plaster of softening should be applied to it, just like a well-made diapalma; or take a mucilage of elder root and mix it with gualinum powder or camphor oil and apply it as a plaster; or use ripe figs that have been mashed with dove's dung, and similar medicines that are named consolidating Amermans.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with gentle and continuous friction using the moistest substances, and movement of the member should be administered in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the crookedness has already become severe and turned to stone, requiring surgical intervention, then it is necessary to cut the part above it and dissolve the continuation of the bone, and remove the excess nodulation from that area with fine incisors, and easy movement should be administered to it with gentle exercise and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	A dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its proper place, preventing movement and distorting the shape of the member, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly to reduce it and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the area becomes infected and the reduction of the dislocation becomes difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to stretch or extend the limb during infection, because often this causes spasms and sharp pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this occurs, then it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the patient and let them rest until the infection subsides; and apply hot water and oil to the member, and reduce it gently.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire member should be treated with what will bring it back to its normal state.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have organized the chapters on dislocation as outlined in the section on fractures, from the upper to the lower parts of the body.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of a dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Both jaws can become dislocated if not treated promptly, and this dislocation occurs in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places and mildly swollen, or they are completely dislocated at the joint, causing the patient to produce excessive saliva and be unable to close their mouth, with their tongue unable to articulate words.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the displacement is minor, it often returns to its normal position on its own with minimal intervention.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But when the dislocation is complete and severe, then it is necessary to reduce it gently and promptly.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the caregiver should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts their finger into the dislocated jaw inside the patient's mouth if the dislocation is on one side, or both fingers if it is on both sides, and the other fingers of the hand should be placed outside the cheeks to provide support. The doctor should then command the patient to relax their jaws and slowly move them from side to side, while gently pushing the jaw back into its normal position with their fingers.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	If the reduction is difficult, especially when both jaws are dislocated, then administer steam inhalation with hot water and oil to make the reduction easier and prompt without delay, as previously mentioned.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they have returned and are held in place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not swollen, then apply hot compresses made of cloth and wax, and gently massage the area with oil and wax to promote healing and reduce swelling. Then bind the jaws with soft bandages to keep them in place.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back with their head resting on a pillow, positioned between two supports to prevent it from tilting to either side, and do not force them to chew for any reason until their jaws are healed and the pain has subsided, at which point they can eat using a knife and fork.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this should be administered with ease and not require effort in chewing or swallowing food and drink until the jaw is healed and restored to its normal state.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	If it is difficult to reduce both jaws when they are dislocated and not in their normal position, then often there are fevers and constant thirst, and the patient's belly becomes swollen and bloated, and they may vomit pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, you should know that it is a peril; and many times, the person dies within ten days (if this happens to them).
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	On reducing the dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated from the back of the ribcage due to its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated in front, and this can be determined by touch.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the treatment for this is for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press firmly on the area with your palm, because it will return (to its proper position).
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place a poultice and powder on it and strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the end of the muscle that is connected to it is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it must be reduced and healed according to what we have said, and according to your abilities.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place a poultice and powder on it, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest and remain quiet until it is healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this careful treatment, the end of the muscle is reduced when it has become separated from its proper position.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On reducing the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tip to the bottom.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second way that it can become dislocated is at the upper end of the muscle, and this occurs rarely; and it is not dislocated at the back by the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated at the front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most often it becomes dislocated and protrudes at the lower ends near the tip, and this is more common in those with less flesh, but in those with a lot of flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And it often happens to some men that they receive a blow or fall, and their muscle becomes inflamed with an abscess-like swelling, and is thought to be dislocated due to this.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, it is necessary that you first examine it before treating it, and then you can proceed with the treatment of it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the lower ends near the tip; therefore, you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, for you will find clear differences between them. And in the head of the muscle, you will find a concavity below the tip near the touch of the head of the muscle, just like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated towards the feet or above, you will clearly feel it and it will not be hidden (or obscured).
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And a light reduction is made for this dislocation when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the patient's arm above; and then places their fingers below the tip of it, and raises the joint with strength to its position, and the minister raises the patient's arm and extends it; and then places it below so that it returns easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if despite what we have said it does not return (to its proper position), and this is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days later, then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in warm water and be administered a poultice that softens and relaxes just as if they were cooked radishes of althea, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient should be positioned on their back and have a woolen pad placed below the tip of it that is soaked in a mixture of levity and firmness, and then the doctor should place their knee on the pad and raise the head of the muscle with strength, and pull the patient's arm to prevent it from being injured at the lower ends, and another minister should hold the patient's head to prevent them from being injured at the lower ends, for this will quickly return to its proper position.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, you can reduce it in this way: and that is to have a person present who is taller than the patient, and stand on the opposite side, and place their muscle below the tip of the patient's dislocation, and raise the tip of the patient's muscle above to where the patient is suspended in air, and another minister should pull the patient's arm from the lower ends of their belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	If the patient is lightweight, then it is appropriate to have them suspended with some other cause, so that the dislocation returns quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And the dislocation is reduced in another manner: that is, a long rod with a rounded top, similar to a mortar, neither thick nor thin, should be placed on the ground below the patient; then sheets should be placed over the top of the rod, and the patient should stand along the length of the rod, with their affected arm stretched downwards beyond the other part; and the body of the patient should be forcefully extended on the other side, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the reduction is difficult for all the reasons mentioned, then use this remedy: that you take a rod that is two cubits long and four dites wide, and its thickness should be lightened in weight according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And over the rounded top, place linen sheets, so that the rod does not harm the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And it should be placed below the affected side of the patient, and the arm or hand should be stretched over the rod towards the lower end, and the rod should be tied to the sling around the body and the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	The arm should be placed over a step ladder according to its width, and the hand should be extended towards the lower end, and the other side of the body should be suspended on the other side, so that the joint returns quickly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the reduction of the joint is complete in any way that is possible for you, then it is appropriate to place a woolen cushion under the affected side; and an emplaster prepared with powdered herbs such as moly and egg white should be applied over all the muscle, so that it covers it, and a bandage should be tied firmly below the affected side; and the ligament should be wrapped around the emplaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to their neck, and left alone, and the hand should not be moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it is appropriate that the patient's food be reduced until the affected limb is healed, for healing is easier in this case.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food should be gradually increased after seven or five days, and gentle exercise should be done; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs on it or for another reason, then it is appropriate to apply cautery with three incisions in that place, as mentioned before in the chapter on cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all that is done and after seven days the ligament has been released and the joint is not closed, and the emplaster and bandage have been applied many times but it is still not healed, and the patient cannot raise their arm above their head, then know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or made soft, and know that the joint will never be able to return to its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The reduction of a dislocation that occurs in the foot or breast or behind is done with impulsion and extension with the hands, until it returns to its place.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And another bandage should be applied to that area, and care should be taken until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is heaviness in the limb during the healing process and slowness in movement, then the patient should take many baths until that heaviness is relieved and they return to their original nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter twenty-seven.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Chapter on the treatment of hip dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty, and it is dislocated in all directions, especially towards the back part from the front part; and the displacement of this joint is not hidden from you because it appears to be sunken below the surface or below the touch, depending on what shape it is dislocated; and when you examine the dislocated hip with your finger, that is made clear to you manifestly, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch it with its muscle. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to quickly set the hip joint and reduce the dislocation before an abscess forms, because if it comes to an abscess, then reduction of the dislocation becomes difficult, and it is rarely healed completely; especially when it is towards the back part, for that type of dislocation is worse than all other types, causes more pain, and often leads to death. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of the joint, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the patient's hand should be stretched with two hands and their arms should be extended, and the doctor's hands should be on the hip and below the patient, and they should push the joint with the tips of their fingers together or with the edge of their palm until it returns to its place. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is towards the front, then it returns by bending the hand with its own hand until it strikes the hip with the edge of the palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply strong and forceful extension.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	That is, that two assistants stretch the arms, and two others hold that position during extension to prevent it from slipping back.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then the arms should be wrapped around completely with long cloths folded over the patient's hand or bandages.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, anoint that area with some oil to facilitate lubrication of the joint, and then push strongly until it returns to its place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And during the reduction of the hip joint, it is necessary to apply a plaster with stypticity and exsiccation with egg white, and bind it firmly with a bandage, and suspend the arm from the neck, and leave it for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then it should be loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you can release the bandage of it and leave it alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for several days until it dries out; and then release the bandage.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if there is heaviness in the patient during the reduction of the joint and their condition allows for movement, then administer hydration with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place a cushion of soft material on the joint, and bind it, leaving it on the bone day and night. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then remove that cushion and place the patient in a bath; when they are dry, then gently rub the joint with moderate friction, and repeat this process three times.
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already spread inside the dental pulp before it becomes noticeable or apparent.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place on the joint a moist and scarified cow's split with butter and bind it on top; do this several times, as it is moist and helps to restore it to its original condition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter twenty-eight.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Chapter on the treatment of dislocation of the wrist joint, which is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The wrist joint is often dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, but it is the opposite for other joints; however, there should be quickness in reducing it at the time it is dislocated, before any abscess forms or an abscess develops.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	The reduction of a wrist dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand on a table and having an assistant extend the arm, and then putting their own hand or palm over the end of the joint, and pushing gently until it returns to its place. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, it is necessary to consider whether the palm is already facing downwards towards the belly of the hand; in that case, the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is anterior to the back of the hand, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsic to the table so that the doctor's hand can come over the end of the joint. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then strengthen it with an emplaster that resolves abscesses and leave it on; do not repeat this process, as it will not be able to bear the reduction of the joint if more than a few days pass. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, if the joint remains displaced due to its twisted shape, and the patient does not feel any cause, but rather their hand is softened and cannot be strengthened for any reason; then know that the nerves are cut or torn, and in this case, it should be treated with cauterization near the sunken area to promote healing quickly. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l\_yPQ3I](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TgR2l_yPQ3I)
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Once the wrist joint has been reduced, then apply the recommended plaster on it and leave it on for five days, while also binding it firmly. After that, release the bandage and let it be left alone, and gradually exercise the hand.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the patient experiences difficulty in moving their wrist and there is heaviness in it, then gently massage it with warm water and gentle friction until they feel relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter twenty-nine.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Chapter on the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Often, toes are dislocated on all sides.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	If any of the toes are dislocated on the backside or the palm side (bottom), then hold onto the toe and push gently yet firmly to reduce the dislocation until it returns to its normal position.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the toe, and suspend it on the side to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days. This means that the patient should avoid putting weight on the affected toe and keep it immobilized to allow the tissues around the joint to heal properly. After two days, the patient can gradually start moving the toe again under the guidance of a healthcare provider. It is important to follow their instructions carefully to ensure proper healing and prevent further injury or complications.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend it (the toe) and stretch it until it is straightened in its place on that day. This means that the dislocated toe should be immobilized in a correct position for proper healing, and gentle stretching exercises can help restore normal range of motion to the joint over time. However, it is important to avoid forcing the toe into an uncomfortable or painful position as this could cause further damage or prolong the healing process. A healthcare provider can provide guidance on appropriate stretches and exercises based on the specific type and severity of the dislocation.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when you are able, lie on that side of the body according to the narrative, and do not stop unraveling it during the day and exercising with movements, and lie on it at night; and do this for several days until it becomes tight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Do the same if it is dislocated in the stomach of the hand, and attach it to that part and perform the first usual operation until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do this when it is dislocated in other parts (of the body).
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.[**Translation note**: The number "xxx" in medieval medical texts typically refers to the Roman numeral for 30, and not the letters "xxx".]
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae (spondylos) of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When any of the vertebrae of the back or neck become completely dislocated and are moved out of place by several vertebrae, then in that case there is no cure, for death threatens the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of this is that the patient's excretion (feces or urine) is expelled without their will and they cannot hold it; and often several members of them are weakened, or both legs or both arms, or one of those; or a vertebra has moved out of place, for often several vertebrae move out of place and the displacement affects all four parts (of the body).
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it has moved towards the back parts and is called "gibbosity" (or hunchbacked condition).[**Translation note**: The word "nompnada" in the text is likely a misspelling of "nompnecada", which comes from the verb "nompenar" (to name) in Old Occitan. I have translated it as "is called"]
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of it is that you should consider whether the gibbosity has occurred during childhood, for in that case there is no cure and not complete healing from it either.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in the case of those that occur by chance or through impact or similar causes, the ancients have already mentioned methods of treatment using lengthy discourse, from which the most important thing is to profit; but I will summarize it briefly since little needs to be said about it, for proximity to a better explanation, with which I have outlined and provided an overview of this instrument, through which I will demonstrate and expand on that. [**Translation note**: The words "instrument" and "exposicio" in the text are likely misspellings of "art" and "disposició" respectively in Old Occitan. I have translated them as "method" and "explanation" instead.]
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gibbosity (gelbozitat) that occurs in the front of the chest, there is neither cure nor healing from it; and similarly, in those that are made on both sides. [**Translation note**: In this sentence, "gelbozitat" refers to a condition similar to hunchback or curvature of the spine, and "la partida denant en le pietz" specifically refers to the chest area.]
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those (cases) cannot be cured except for those that occur in the back properly with what I have mentioned. [**Translation note**: In this sentence, "aquo que yeu recomti" likely refers to some treatment or method mentioned earlier in the text.]
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient be laid out on their back with a soft cushion under their head near the wall, and have the instrument placed beneath them while making sure their feet are not injured. [**Translation note**: Here, "esturment" likely refers to some type of medical device or tool mentioned earlier in the text.]
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then place a straight rod (fust) under the patient's neck, inserted into the ground near their head, and another rod on their feet at the other end of the same rod (pug).
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And let the assistant hold the rod and not be confined in a pit; and another assistant should hold the other one in the same manner.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap a bandage around the patient's head and tie it firmly with tight knots; extend one end of the bandage to the rod that is placed near their head, and securely bind it there; and stretch another bandage over their hips, knees, and thighs, and adjust all the bandages and bind them to the other rod that is placed near their feet. [**Translation note**: Here, "liament" likely refers to a type of bandage or strap used in medical treatment.]
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then let each assistant extend the bandage to the part of the rod, and make sure that both rods and the bandages in their places where they are fixed are not dislodged, but still, do not fasten them too tightly as I mentioned earlier.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places their palms on the vertebra with force until it returns to its place, or they can place a table over it and adjust their weight on top of the table until it returns. [**Translation note**: Here, "spondylo" likely refers to a single vertebra in the spine.]
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return using that method, then take a table that is three arms' length in either its width or length, and carve out a niche in the wall near the patient where the end of the table can fit inside. [**Translation note**: Here, "brassa" likely refers to an arm's length as a unit of measurement.]
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the weight of the table over the vertebra, and let the doctor place their weight on the other end, and apply force until the vertebra is compressed and returns to its proper position.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a hole in the ground behind the patient's head and neck using a drill that is rotated by hand; place two rods of one arm's length each in the ground, one at the back of their head and the other at the base of their neck, with a space between them that is one palm's width. Each rod should have a hole bored through it, allowing a turn to pass through and be firmly secured in place so that they do not move. [**Translation note**: Here, "torn" likely refers to a hand-cranked drill or auger used for boring holes. The word "fustz" has been translated as "rods", but could also refer to wooden pegs, stakes, or posts.]
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And place a round piece of wood with the hole in it over the two rods, and attach the drill to the holes in both rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it is a hole where the rod fits in, one palm's length and able to rotate; and the same is true for the other two rods. [**Translation note**: Here, "fust" has been translated as "rod", but could also refer to wooden pegs, stakes, or posts.]
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the bandages that you wrapped around the patient's feet in the hole near their head and the bandages that you wrapped around their hips in the drill near their feet.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then place each drill and let an assistant turn it with their hand, applying force to the vertebra as I mentioned earlier.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the drill:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the vertebra has returned to its place and the wound is cleaned, it is necessary to apply a drying plaster made with egg white and albumen, as well as cotton; and then place over the plaster a wooden board that is three fingers wide or thereabouts, and long enough to cover the area of the curvature, placed on top of the affected vertebra. [**Translation note**: Here, "ditz" likely refers to fingers as a unit of measurement.]
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then bind it with the bandages I mentioned earlier, and provide the patient with subtle nutrition until they are healed. [**Translation note**: Here, "nutriment subtil" likely refers to a light or easily digestible diet.]
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there is any residual stiffness in the area during the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medications that soften and clean with long-term use of the tablets that I recommended earlier; and a sheet of lead has already been applied to the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes stiffness occurs in the back of the vertebrae due to dislocation, and this is caused by that bone that protrudes, which should not be forced with this medication as it can cause serious harm or even death. [**Translation note**: Here, "cujat" likely means "stiffened", and "imineys" refers to the bony projections on the back of vertebrae.]
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle are only dislocated and not separated, and do not have the same small movement or concavity as other joints.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: either it is dislocated towards the inner side, or towards the outer side, or towards the front, or towards the back. [**Translation note**: Here, "anca" has been translated as "hip", and "dislocada a las partidas dedintz" means "dislocated to the inner part".]
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is mostly dislocated towards the inner side, and less frequently towards the front or back. [**Translation note**: Here, "anca" has been translated as "hip", and "dislocada a las partidas dedintz" means "dislocated to the inner part".][**Note**: The text seems to indicate that dislocation of the hip joint is most commonly found towards the inner side, which may be consistent with medical literature on hip dislocations.]
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation towards the inner side is that when you align the patient's healthy leg with the affected leg, the affected leg appears longer and more prominent in the thigh than the healthy leg, and the patient cannot bend their knee as much as they should be able to. Additionally, there may be a lump near the crease of the thigh, which is an abscess or swelling caused by a displaced piece of bone, indicating that the head of the femur has moved out of place. [**Translation note**: Here, "anca" has been translated as "hip", and "dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz" means "dislocation towards the inner side". The word "lenguonar" has been translated as "bend the knee", but could also refer to bending the leg at the knee joint. The phrase "apostema caut" likely refers to an abscess or collection of pus caused by a displaced piece of bone.][**Note**: Medical literature on hip dislocations notes that this type of injury is often accompanied by a visible deformity, such as a prominent thigh or shortened leg, and limited range of motion in the affected limb.]
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of the injury that results in dislocation towards the outer side is that its symptoms are opposite to those mentioned earlier for dislocation towards the inner side.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	The sign of dislocation towards the front is that the leg extends as expected but there is pain in the thigh and the patient cannot bend their knee without difficulty. Additionally, they may have trouble walking and be unable to move their legs forward, and their urinary function may be impaired, resulting in retention of urine or swelling. It is recommended that the patient walk with a cane or crutch to support themselves.[**Translation note**: Here, "anca" has been translated as "hip", and "dislocacio a las partidas denant" means "dislocation towards the front". The phrase "expans la camba sieua segon compliment" means that the leg extends as expected or normally. The word "engonar" has been translated as "swelling", but could also refer to inflammation.][**Note**: Medical literature notes that dislocations of the hip joint can result in various complications, such as injury to blood vessels, nerves, and surrounding soft tissue, as well as impaired range of motion and limited mobility.]
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	A sign of one who has a dislocation in the back parts is that they cannot stretch the muscle, nor can they bend the one in front without bending the other, and the thigh of the affected side is shorter than the other, and the groin on that side is relaxed, and the head of the femur is out of place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, reduction of the dislocation depends on whether it is old and chronic or recent. If the dislocation is old and has already formed a scar, then proceed with reduction and keep it in its position. But if this is not the case, then it is not necessary to perform manipulation.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case of one with a recent dislocation, which is one of the four types of dislocations, you must ensure that you turn the joint and stretch it both internally and externally, and then move it to the right and left, as it will easily return to its place and will not require any other treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare and administer a strong extension to the thigh of the lower part, or with their hands, or with a ligament that is tied above the muscle; and have another person extend the arm of the affected limb in such a way as to place their hands below the crease of the knee; and apply strong pressure with a ligament on the head of the femur, and have another person hold the end of the ligament tightly.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And perform an extension of the groin to the thigh at the level of the pelvis, or from the back to the chest.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And perform all these extensions in one go, so that the patient is raised with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary for each type of treatment that I will now describe.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is dislocated inward and the dislocation is in the inner parts, it is necessary that the patient be raised up on their side; and place the ligaments over the head of the femur at that point where the head of the femur enters between the location that is just above the groin; and extend the ligament upward from the thigh to the highest part of the pelvis.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And have another person strongly grasp the patient's arms and press on the large muscle of the affected thigh, extending it outward forcefully, as this will return to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is of easier treatment for reducing this limb than the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if the patient resists and does not obey the treatment with this type of cure, then it is necessary to tie both of their feet together with a ligament, lightly but firmly, over the heels and toes.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let the length of each ligament be four finger widths, and let the affected thigh be extended more than the other by two finger widths.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And let the patient be suspended over the top of the post, and in the middle; and let the length of the ligament from the ground be two arm lengths.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young person to pull down on the head of the femur, and let them be suspended with the patient along with another young person, who will push the thigh upwards forcefully, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the reduction of the dislocation, when it is located on the outer part, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back as we have recommended in the case of a groin strain; and apply strong pressure with a ligament directly on the affected thigh and on the foot of the patient.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And let two poles be placed, one under the feet and the other at the head; and let adjusted poles be placed in the middle of the bed on which dampened sheets are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, as this will prevent extension to the lower parts.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And let each person extend on their side, and the doctor with their hand guides the reduction according to art (i.e., skill).
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if they obey in reverse (i.e., the reduction is successful), it will be very good; and if not, then apply pressure carefully and as we said in the case of a groin strain for guidance.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary for the patient to lie on their side gently.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary to slightly extend the thigh and follow this same narration on the bed; place the palm of your right hand on the affected groin, and with your other hand apply pressure and hold the extension to the lower parts at the level of the knee.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended at the lower parts and they should be raised off the ground; it is necessary that they lie on a hard surface, as we said before regarding lifting them if their hips are dislocated to the outer parts, according to what we said about supporting them on two wide surfaces; and have them lie on their back with the ligaments extended, as we said, without delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to apply compression with a board on the location where the joint protrudes.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, when the reduction is completed as necessary — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, and it is that the patient extends both thighs, and when you see them straighten and the patient resists with their excuse, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place — then adjust the hips and apply a plaster, extending it with bandages so that the hip is not damaged in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then loosen the ligament and plaster, and compare one thigh with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see them equal in appearance, then know that the dislocation has healed and so let the patient go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of relaxation, then return and reapply the plaster to that area and extend it according to your initial measurement, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then loosen the plaster and have the patient delay in walking for several days, until they are strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Chapter 32: On the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways, which are: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the lower parts more than to the back parts; but it cannot be dislocated to the front parts.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of ankle dislocation is that you command the patient to flex their leg by bringing their heel towards their buttock, and if they are unable to do so, then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all three ways of ankle dislocation is that you make the patient lie down straight, so that they can extend their leg if possible; place your hands on their thigh and hold it still, and place their foot between your feet; then apply pressure with your palms on their ankle and hold it firmly between your fingers over their ankle, and apply strong pressure, and have another person extend the patient's foot until the ankle returns to its proper position.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction of the dislocation is that their leg adheres to their thigh without exerting any force.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a plaster to the area and bind the leg to the thigh with a bandage for three or four days, and then loosen the bandages.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And the patient should not walk for several days, until they have healed and are strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of the ankle is resisted by the patient, then administer strong extension with ligatures, as described in the treatment of hip dislocation.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Chapter 33: On the treatment of talus dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus bone can sometimes be subluxated (partially dislocated) due to a minor injury, and in other cases it can be fully dislocated as a result of complete rupture of the ligaments that hold it in place. Dislocation of the talus can occur either inward or outward.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of talus dislocation is that you see it protruding towards the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	However, the treatment of talar subluxation (minor displacement) is relatively easy to reduce and involves gentle extension with the hands while guiding it back into place.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	However, in the treatment of a talus dislocation that is fully displaced, it is necessary to make the patient lie down straight and have a strong and capable assistant support the back of the affected limb in the middle position.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then place your right hand under the highest part of the foot and your left hand below the ankle on the heel.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and push it with your left hand in two movements, and extend it with your left hand while pushing the heel of the foot upwards with your right hand.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that twice, as I have mentioned.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then on the third occasion, bend the foot towards the calf, and you be at the ankle.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	So if it returns in one or two instances in this manner, and if the foot becomes swollen, that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation, because it will return.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if it is forbidden for you to reduce it with the method I have recommended, then make the patient lie on their side on the ground and place a small cushion firmly on the ground between their thighs. Wrap a cloth around them so that they do not slip out from under the cushion.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And have one attendant hold the patient's thighs and another extend their leg with their hands or by pulling gently on the lower leg; each attendant should pull in the opposite direction to stretch the patient's limb, and the cushion should be placed between the patient's thighs, retaining them in position so that the body does not move downwards due to the limb's extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And the doctor should reduce the dislocation with their hands and another attendant should hold the healthy thigh down below, because the dislocation can easily return.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns and you are certain of the success of the reduction, then apply an emplaster and wrap it firmly, and bind the foot to the calf.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And you must be cautious of the nerves that are located near the heel, and apply the bandage gently over that area to avoid causing damage or injuring it excessively.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes soaked, remove it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And unwrap it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if the patient is forced to walk within that time frame, there is a danger that the dislocation may become aggravated and incurable, and it may not heal properly.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if an abscess forms, then it is necessary to administer in the place where it has developed the treatment that we mentioned earlier in our narrative, using incision and drainage as a cure until it has healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter 34.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	On the treatment of dislocation of the toes.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that a dislocation be swollen with little extension and effort, and it is not difficult, rather easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in the joints of the second toe, then it is necessary that you have the patient place their foot on a hard surface such as the ground or a table, and remain standing in that position as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And you should stand firmly and place your foot over the joints, and then apply pressure with your foot on the affected area with strength until it returns to normal. You should check that it is swollen and that there is no bulge in the area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And place a board under the sole of the patient's foot that supports the entire foot, with two ends, and firmly secure it with appropriate tension for three days. Then unbind it and allow the patient to rest from walking for several days until it is healed and there is no risk of relapse.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	On the types of dislocation caused by wounds, fractures, or both together.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When such causes occur and you strive to cure and restore the affected area, many times death will follow.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And therefore, one should not presume in curing such cases but instead seek the help of a wise and experienced physician who is merciful, compassionate, cautious, and humble. They should initially use medicines that only reduce abscesses, leaving the patient to divine judgment. But they should hope for salvation from perdition with alleviation of the illness, and there should be some hope for recovery.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, strive to make the reduction as soon as possible at the onset of the injury before any abscesses form.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the limb returns as we desire, then administer a regimen that will reduce abscesses and treat the wound with drying agents as appropriate.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and there are separated bone fragments, then you should perform the treatment for their stabilization, and do what we have said in simple injuries that is mentioned in the previous sections regarding these types of cases.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard yourself and avoid as much as possible any intrusion into the patient's body through fearful means, according to my previous warning. This is better for you with your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and more true health for your body in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, may God bless him.
Amen.	Indeed, may it be so.
