Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasis. (Albucasis was a famous Andalusian physician from the 10th century.)
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the culmination of the medical science, and having reached its end in it, and exposited and explained it, it seems to me that I should also pass on to you this treatise, which is a part of the practice with my hand, that is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	For the practice with my hand is almost entirely extinct in our region and time, so that the science of it is nearly lost and only remains in some small descriptions within the books of ancient writers, which have been altered by later hands leading to error and confusion such that their intentions are hidden and the force of the art has been weakened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it seems to me that I should revive the practice of this treatise by way of exposition and explanation and abridgement; and may it come with illustrations of the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of the craft as well as an added explanation, which is necessary for its preparation.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the reason why a good practitioner with his hand cannot be found in our time is because the art of medicine is complex and its doer must first be trained in the science of anatomy as Galen teaches that one must know the uses and forms of the members, their junction and separation; and have knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, their number, and their exits; and of pulsatile and non-pulsatile veins, and their places of issuance.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for this reason Hippocrates says that a name is one thing but the work little, and even less so in the craft of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But we have already said this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not learned in what we have said about anatomy, it is not to be expected that he will not fall into error such that many men will die, as I have seen too often, for some are trained in this science and yet throw off their knowledge and experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who attempted to lance an abscess in a woman's neck, and cut some arteries of the neck such that great blood flowed out and the woman died in his hands.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another doctor who attempted to extract a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large, it came out but with a piece of the bladder, because of which the man died three days later. [Anatomical terms: peyra (stone), vesiqua (bladder)]
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I myself was called to extract that stone, and saw by its size and the condition of the patient that he would die. [Anatomical terms: peyra (stone)]
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another doctor who was paid by a duke of our land to practice surgery, and he operated on a black castrate who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor, through his ignorance, treated the fracture with padding and splints very tightly, without allowing the wound to breathe. [Anatomical terms: crastrat (castrated), coyssa (thigh)]
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And he bound it according to his desires, and wrapped it up, and left it alone for several days and ordered that it not be unbound; and it remained so until the thigh and foot became abscessed and led to the patient's destruction. [Anatomical terms: coyssa (thigh)]
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to the patient and prepared to unbind him, and this brought peace and an end to his pains. [Anatomical terms: coyssa (thigh)]
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But gangrene had already set in the limb, and I was unable to stop it, and the gangrene continued to spread through the member until the patient was at risk of death. [Anatomical terms: membre (limb)]
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another doctor who lanced an abscess of cancer, and it became ulcerated for several days until the malignancy was greatly increased in its master. [Anatomical terms: apostema (abscess), cancros (cancer)]
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The reason for this is that the cancerous growth is pure black bile, and it should not be treated with iron from head to toe, but only in the member which can accommodate it entirely.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And for this reason sons, it is necessary that the practice with my hand be divided into two categories: one which is associated with health and another in which there is danger even in the best conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already mentioned this in all places of this book where there is error and fear in operation; it is necessary for you therefore to beware and avoid such things so that the pages do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so take up your arms with diligence and under the protection of God, and approach your patients with ease and confidence.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best approach by the grace of God for health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible illnesses which are difficult to cure, and hold back your weapons from that which makes you afraid, so that doubt in your faith and your name does not overcome you: for it is left for your glory, and it will remain in this world and after in your sanctity.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Galen also says in some of his monitions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat bad illness with bad medicine, lest you be named a bad doctor."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	I have divided this book into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Here begins the division of the book, and first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter is ordered from the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the ironwork of cauteries, and that which is necessary for operation. [Medical terms: cap (head), pes (feet)]
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter is about dryness and perforation, and cupping glasses, and wounds, and the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and ordered according to the forms of instruments. [Medical terms: ventosas (cupping glasses), plaguas (wounds)] [Anatomical terms: sagetas (arrows)]
Divisio de la tersa partida.	The division of the third part. [Medical terms: partida (part)]
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, and treatment of twisting and similar things, all categorized from the head to the feet, and ordered according to the forms of instruments. [Medical terms: torcio (twisting), partida (part)][Anatomical terms: cap (head), pes (feet)]
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	On cautery with fire and sharp medicine, and reminder of the operation. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery), opperacio (operation)] [Anatomical terms: cap (head), pes (feet)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	With this begins the treatise of the entire book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	It is necessary that I say something about the benefits and harms of this cautery, and in what condition it should be forbidden.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the discourse about the benefits and harms of cautery is long and prolix, subtle with knowledge, and hidden in meaning; many wise men have spoken about it and they disagree about it, and I will only take up a small part of their discourses lest I prolong my discussion too much. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)]
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And so I say that cautery is beneficial in all universal conditions with or without matter, except for two conditions which are dry and without matter. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical conditions: compleccio caudas ses materia (dry and without matter condition)] [Medical substances: materia (matter), medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the dry and cold condition with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial to this condition, while others say the contrary, that it is not suitable in a sickness which is caused by dryness and cold, because fire has heat and dryness as its nature, and it is unsuitable that a sickness which is dry and cold be healed with something hot and dry. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery), caliditat (heat)][Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical conditions: compleccio cauda e secca am materia (dry and cold condition with matter)] [Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)]
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say that those who argue the contrary are mistaken, because cautery is beneficial for every cold and dry sickness which appears in human bodies, because when you compare human bodies and their humidity to fire, you find that the bodies of humans are much more wet. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery), cauda e secca (cold and dry)][Anatomical terms: cors (body)] [Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)] [Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say by the discourse of that person, that I have experimented with this many times and discovered it to be true. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	However it is not necessary to go into detail about this in the chapter on cautery, which has already been proven and practiced many times, and one who has experienced and known the diversity of human constitutions and dispositions of illnesses, and their causes, and accidents, and the time frame for these things. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	However in other conditions, there is no fear for you, especially in cold and wet illnesses, for all doctors agree on these things, and they do not disagree about the benefit of cautery in such cases. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that the secret of healing with cautery using fire and its goodness lies in cautery using sharp medicine, because fire is simple and its action does not go beyond the member which is cauterized, but only affects the adjacent member slightly. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of sharp medicine goes beyond this member to those which are connected, and it easily causes illness in the affected member and makes healing difficult and brings quick harm. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery), medicina comburent (sharp medicine)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)[Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its sublimity and substance, does not do this but rather superfluous matter is expelled, and this has been known to us through experiment and the length of service in studying this art and understanding the truth of causes; and so I am excused for the length of this discourse. And if it were not that it would be hidden from you, secretly with fire, and its quality of operation on bodies and expulsion by which it expels illnesses, explained with philosophical demonstration which would be useful in your studies, then I would pause here. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery), foc (fire)][Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time of year in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and prefer the best time in spring. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)][Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cautery is suitable in all times, because the harm caused by accidental time is subsumed by the benefit of what is brought about with cautery, and especially if it is necessary for pain or painful necessities, strong and urgent, which do not allow delay, and therefore there is fear of damage from those things which would bring greater harm than that caused by the time. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)[Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)] [Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)]
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And this should not concern you, sons, but rather only the common people and foolish doctors think this way, that is that a sickness which can be healed by cautery cannot always be reduced to it, and they leave aside its consequence. [Medical terms: cauteri (cautery)] [Anatomical terms: membro (limb)][Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)[Medical conditions: compleccio del foc (condition caused by fire)] [Medical substances: medicina aguda (sharp medicine)][Medical qualities: caliditat (heat), siccitat (dryness)] [Anatomical terms: cors (body)][Medical concepts: disposicio (disposition), causa (cause), accident (accident), espasi del temps (time frame)
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not as they think, because cautery is not a substitute for medicine; rather, it alters the complexion and dries out the dampness, which is the cause of pains coming on.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Nevertheless, cautery is used in excess over medicine due to the willfulness of its value and virtue, as well as the greatness of its master.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on their constitution, the location of their ailment, their vitality, and what has accumulated in their body through the addition of excesses, as well as what they have acquired in terms of food and similar causes; unless the ailment for which cautery is administered is subtle and located in a member with few excesses and moisture, such as toothache or similar ailments. In that case, it is possible that the pain will not return, but only to a small degree.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And common speech holds that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and this is true, not in the sense that I understand it, for I believe that there is no cure more beneficial than one using medicine or another means besides cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the reason is to the contrary; the idea that cautery is the last remedy of medicine does not mean that it should be administered only when all other methods of treatment have failed in certain illnesses, but rather when those medicines are unsuccessful, and as a last resort at the end of the cause, it proves beneficial.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And so it is clear that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, but not in the sense understood by the common people and many foolish doctors.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this without reason, but rather because of the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	The ancients said that the location of cautery does not matter, but this is not entirely true, as I have proven and discovered that it matters in certain cases. Cautery with gold is good and better than iron, as they said; however, when using fire and gold for cautery, one must be careful, as the gold heats up according to the amount of heat applied due to its malleability and softness. If too much ignition is applied, the gold can melt due to the heat, causing some layers to separate and fall off, which can hinder the work of the practitioner.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And so, cautery is performed with iron because it allows for more precise and controlled heat application during the operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	I have organized this chapter on cautery according to the topics, and specifically addressed the section on the head down to the feet, in order to clarify what you may be seeking from me.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Here is the section on cautery for pain in the head due to cold and dampness:
Le capitol primier.	Here is the first chapter:
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This type of cautery is beneficial for dampness and coldness, which are the two causes of scrofula and various types of rheumatic fluxes, known as corizza, that affect the head and flow from the eyes and ears, causing excessive sleepiness, toothaches, migraines, and generally any illness caused by coldness. This includes paralysis, scrofula, and apoplexy, among other conditions.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The method for this type of cautery is as follows: first, the practitioner should instruct the patient to undergo a laxative treatment to cleanse the head and purify the body by taking the appropriate medicine for three or four nights, depending on the patient's vitality, age, and habits.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then the practitioner should instruct the patient to shave their head with a razor and perform a specific exercise by placing their hands on a slanted bench, resting their chest on the bench, and placing their hands under their armpits. This exercise is called "sezer" and helps promote blood flow and prepare the scalp for cautery.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then the practitioner should place the edge of their palm over the bridge of the patient's nose, between their eyes. This gesture is called "razit" and is used to help relax the patient and prepare them for cautery.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	However, when the practitioner reaches the desired location, they should mark that spot with ink and then ignite the olive-shaped cautery tool, which has the following form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then the practitioner should place the cautery tool over the marked spot, applying gentle pressure to gradually constrict the skin, while rotating the tool in a circular motion. This helps ensure that the heat is evenly distributed and reduces the risk of damage to surrounding tissue.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then the practitioner should gently lift their hand and check the area to see if any bone has been exposed due to the cautery process. If so, they should elevate their hand again and continue using the cautery tool until they can see that the bone is visible. If the tool becomes too cold, they should replace it with another one that is still hot.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then the practitioner should take a pinch of salt and dissolve it over the area, leaving it there for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then the practitioner should apply a soft, damp cloth over the area and leave it there until the burn scar has been destroyed by the heat of the cautery tool.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then the practitioner should care for the area using a four-ingredient ointment until it has healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they have said that when the wound remains open, the arm gets better, therefore it is more beneficial and advantageous.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they have said that a abscess should be cauterized in the bone within the bone, and the cautery should be held there until some part of the affected bone becomes attached to it.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	Then remove what is attached to the bone, and let it be healed.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others have said that with the cautery, it should reach the rear until it enters the bone strongly, and this is the method of small abscess:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they consider that from that location expire the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And let the wound remain open for a long time, and let it be cured until it is solidified.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But I have not seen these two types of cautery in all places, but only in some men for fear; and let that be enough, it is better to be healthy as long as possible, since the head is weakened by the dissolution of its continuity, just as we have testified in other members, especially when the patient's head is of a cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first type of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and with that one let it be done with safety.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Two.
Del cauteri del cap.	About the cauterization of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-term pain occurs in the entire head, and the patient uses helmets, bandages, hair treatments, ointments, wigs, and similar things, and especially if they have already been cauterized with a cautery but it has not helped them with any of those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature, and not weak, and there is little swelling. In that case, cauterize with another cautery just below the first one slightly.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize on top of the crown of their head with a cautery until the bone is divided.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the bone and expose the amount of bone that we have measured, and cauterize it with a cautery in the rear part of the head in the location called "vas", which is where a cupping glass is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And lift your hand in this way, and do not expose the bone, because the patient experiences a great deal of pain that is different from the pain caused by all other cauterizations on the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And I say that this cautery should be used in its place, because it is necessary to use a more subtle cautery for cauterizing the horns of the head and the occiput than the one used for cauterizing the middle part of the head; and this is the method.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	About the cauterization of non-ancient migraines. [(Note: The translator assumed that "emigranea no-antiqua" refers to recent or new onset migraine.)]
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When a severe headache occurs, or throbbing pain inside the ear, evacuate the head with purging medicine and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the sections on illnesses; and if it is of no use, cauterization should be done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	Cauterization with a burning medicine is when you take a twig of aloe, scrape it, and burn the ends of it at both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then make an incision in the temple at the location of the pain with a lanced lancet until it is in the correct place behind the ear, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then apply pressure to it with a stopper to reduce constriction and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove the aloe, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place a compress soaked in hot water on it until the area becomes warm.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you wish, do so with some burning medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But cauterization with iron is done in this way: the form of the cautery for fire is as follows:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called "clavus calamus", because the tip of it is shaped like a nail with some curvature, and in its middle there is a small prominent part.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it on the location of the pain, and hold your hand so that the arch (of the iron) which is below does not get burnt, and rotate the iron slowly with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount that is burnt by the tip of the cautery is as much as the size of it, then lift your hand so that the arch (of the iron) which is below does not get burnt, so that the artery which is beneath it is not burnt and there is no flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then soak a compress in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it for three days; and then place a compress soaked in hot water, and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, then cauterize with the tip of the knife like a cautery, and be careful about cutting an artery in this modern type of headache.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	About cauterization for ancient migraines.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you treat migraines with what we have mentioned in the previous cure and what we have mentioned in the sections on illnesses, but the treatment is not effective, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease it does not suffice for what we have said about cauterization with medicine or fire, then it is necessary to burn the knife-like cautery until it turns white, because this indicates the location of pain with a line of length equal to the size of your finger or even smaller; and then place your hand on it once and press it so that you cut the arch and reach the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary for you to be careful about the continuation of the jawbone which moves due to chewing, and that the tendon does not get burnt and the nerves which move it, and that there is no spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And about the precautions and caution for the flow of blood from the cut artery, because cutting it is dangerous, especially for those who are unaware of what they are doing and are not studious or experienced; and leave the operation to someone else at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	I will come back with a reminder of the regulation of blood flow from an accident of the arch in its own way, in its own place in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for this illness and you see that the patient's body can tolerate it, then cauterize in the middle of the head as we have mentioned, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you wish, administer the cautery which we mentioned in the chapter on stretching of the arch with two knives, and this is better and more effective cauterization.
Capitol .v.	Chapter Five.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	About cauterization for earaches.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the section, but the pain is not relieved, then use fire cautery, and this is called puncture, and its shape is as follows:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And then make the puncture and burn it around the entire ear like a wheel rotates, or in the circumference of any part if the pain is in one place.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Bring yourself closer to the cautery of the edge of the ear little by little as you have marked the location with a probe.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if you make ten punctures in the entire ear, and even more if necessary, and then cure the areas until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter Six.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	About cauterization for swelling.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	Swelling which is cured and does not require cauterization is of the types that come by vein, as we have said in the sections on illnesses.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the type that comes by dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you treat this type of swelling with herbs such as jerry, caper spurge and guarguarium, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And place the cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, because softening will only occur in the healthy-looking part.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize it with the cautery at the top and a little above the highest point of the ear, on the temple, the length of which should be the same as the width of your finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until the amount of the tip of the ear has been burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of knife, and its shape is in front of the table.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But it is even more subtle than that, like you can see; and it is necessary that the knife in it has a little less excess.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with what comes before the process until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter Seven.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Chapter Seven: On Cauterization for Ancient Apoplexy
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it with what we have said and your medicine does not work and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize them with four cauteries: above all the corners of their head; and with a cautery in the middle of their head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the neck.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of cauterization is done as previously mentioned.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And (the cautery) has already been performed on the mouth of the stomach, and it is more severe; and let it be cured with what proceeds (in the treatment).
Capitol .viii.	Chapter Eight.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Chapter Eight: On Cauterization for Forgetfulness Made by Flame
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	It is necessary that large herbs and cleansing pills be given to the patient at the beginning.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the patient's entire head and apply a plaster of wax described in the treatise on plasters to their neck.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place that on several times, because that is the way to use cautery.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that in the same order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And so if the person is cured by this treatment, but if not, then perform three cauterizations on the back of their head, with the cuts extending from the highest part of the head down to the lower part of the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And place the width of a finger between each cauterization, and then heal the cautery with the appropriate method.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if the patient is tolerant to this, then perform a cauterization in the middle location; and if there is more need, then cauterize on both ears (or horns).
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then heal the one that has been cured, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped as previously described.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	On the cauterization of parazilis (possibly a term for a medical condition) and on the softening of the entire body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	It is necessary that you proceed with the cleaning of the head using jerras and what we have mentioned; and then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it in the middle location on the head, and on both ears (or horns) of the head, and on the back part of the head, and with three cauterizations on the spondylis (possibly a term for a medical condition) of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary for the treatment of softening of the body due to excess moisture in patients who are tolerant and the disease is severe, then cauterize with four cauterizations on the spondylis (possibly a term for a medical condition) of the back, and specifically at the spot where the spine protrudes significantly from the body, and lift up the patient's tunic.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then heal the one that has been cured, and let this (cauterization) be olive-shaped.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	On the cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	The epileptic should not be cauterized unless the epilepsy is caused by phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And so it is necessary to clean the brain of the patient at the beginning with jerras and the other cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and tolerates the exception of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer laxatives and chewable substances that cleanse the servant (the body), for several days, with good quality food.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the patient's head and cauterize it with one cautery in the middle location on the head, following the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head (occiput), and cauterize on each ear (or horn) of the head.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is severe and tolerant, then cauterize with several cauteries that I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body on the spondylis (possibly a term for a medical condition) of the neck and back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And let the cautery be olive-shaped as previously described.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery in this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On the cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize with the cauteries that I have mentioned for paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that leads to melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them something to drink that cleanses the brain, as has been described previously in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the patient's head and make a proper tourniquet from linen to place on their forehead in the middle location of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And let the patient be 60 years old and be held on all sides (i.e., kept still).
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a liniment; and it is more worthy of an old sheep's wool.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that (liniment) over a fire with tempered heat measured by the patient's tolerance when it is applied to them.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then apply that (liniment) in the middle location of the head on their forehead, and let it sit until it has cooled down.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this with the patient once a week, following their other good regimen until they are cured; or if you wish, cauterize with small points according to their needs, as long as you have a cautery prepared in this way: this is a type of cautery that moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that piece (of cloth) soaked in linen or woolen fabric.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	On the cauterization of water that descends (i.e., flows) in the ear.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When you have identified the signs of water in the ear that I have described previously in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and protect them from all moisture.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make him sweat in a hot bath for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then order him to raise his head, and cauterize the spot on his head with a cautery; and then cauterize the spot with two cauteries above the two temples if it is the beginning of watery discharge in both nostrils, or with one cautery if it is the beginning of watery discharge from one nostril.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise all the veins and arteries that are located below the nape of the neck; and let the cauteries be in that area, at the width of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And be careful not to cause bleeding when cauterizing; and if you see that there is bleeding, stop it with some kind of medicine that is available to you.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	I will come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and the removal of abscesses, as well as caution regarding bleeding.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And sometimes it is necessary to cauterize the area below the two bones in the neck with two properly prepared cauteries.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	On the cautery of ancient tears (or: old teardrops).
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When the tears from the eyes have become old and are excreted through the veins and arteries that are located in the visible part of the head outside, and it has been determined that this is due to excessive and inflamed flow, then cauterize the area with a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of watery discharge from the eyes, and also cauterize the spot in the middle of the head and above the two temples, and above the two bones in the neck with two cauteries.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if it is necessary to add more treatment, then cauterize the area at the outer corner of the eye, above the edge of the eyebrow, with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	On the cautery of foul smell from the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you treat someone with the method that we have described in the division (or: section) and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give to the patient to drink the broth of chickpeas for three nights; and shave their head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized olive-shaped cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize the area with a nail-shaped cautery, using two cauteries above the eyebrows, just below the hairline.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And be careful not to cut the artery.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the shape of the nail-shaped cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	On the cautery for softening the eyelids.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid has become soft due to illness or moisture, then cauterize it with a crescent-shaped cautery, and this is its shape:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if that is not effective, then cauterize the area above the eyebrows with two small cauteries on both sides, and let them be elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but only until about a third of the eyelid has been cauterized.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	On the cautery for the eyelid of the eye when the eyelashes have become ingrown and are causing inflammation in the inner corner of the eye.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the eyelashes have become ingrown and are causing inflammation in the inner corner of the eye, there are two ways to use cautery as a treatment: either with fire or with a burning medicine.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If using a cautery of fire, instruct the patient to read their eyelashes as if they were cleaning them, extending and shaping them until they are long and curved; and if they become inflamed at the base, then you should strengthen the eyes of the patient with a bandage so that they do not become damaged while the lashes are growing back.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Once the lashes have grown back and are curved, then place a bandage over the patient's eyes and apply a sign on the eyelid of each eye with a tentative mark in the shape of a myrtle leaf, with the beginning of the sign located near the base of the eyelashes.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then place a soft pad soaked in egg white or mucilage made from pith on the eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And apply fire with the following shape of cautery.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And cauterize along the marked figure, gradually, in small strokes, until the surface of the skin is burned and appears like a myrtle leaf, entirely consistent in appearance.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	The sign of health for this procedure is that you see the patient's eyelid already contracted, and their hairy skin raised around the puncture on the eye.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	Therefore, lift it up and leave it for three days, then place your hand over the wound until the scab forms.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And treat that with ointment until it heals.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if it returns around the hairs for any reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then perform cautery on that area again just as you did before.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs are on the lower eyelid, then cauterize that area until it rises to its natural position and is healed, so that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But use a burning medical cautery that you command the patient to pull out their hairs until they are elongated and healed, and then make a myrtle leaf-shaped patch from paper or cloth.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And take known soapwort and fresh cow dung in one ounce. That is, Or what is the same thing, mix those ingredients well and quickly so that they are not chilled; then spread that mixture on the paper shaped like a myrtle leaf and place it over one or both eyes; and place a cup of warm egg white below the affected eye, and have the patient lie down in your presence.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And place the poultice over the eye and press gently on it, but do not cause pain; keep it there until the patient feels a stinging sensation from the medicine, for this stinging is like fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And so, when you perceive that the stinging sensation has begun, then remove the poultice and apply your hand; when the stinging ceases, then replace the poultice and rinse the eye with water; then consider whether the eyelid has risen as it should be due to the constriction from fire or incision, for then it is well; but if not, return to that place on the eye where the medicine has not yet been applied and do not degrade your operation until it heals and the eyelid contracts.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And treat that wound with bandages until the hardened skin of the abscess is removed; then heal it with ointment or another treatment until it heals completely.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary for you, during your procedure, to be vigilant and ensure that no residue of the medicine falls into the eye; if the eyelid remains softened for several days, and some hairs irritate the eye, then repeat your treatment on that area of the eyelid that has become softened, just as you did at the beginning, and continue to treat it until it heals.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the shape of myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, so therefore adjust your treatment accordingly.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And it is not hidden from those who study this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter seventeen.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	On the cauterization of fistulas in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the sections on diseases and do not pay attention to your treatment, it is appropriate that you cauterize that in this way: command the patient to place their head in your presence, and hold their head with some assistant in such a manner that they are neither harmed nor agitated by moving their head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place a compress soaked in egg white or in a paste of bread on the patient's eye.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And apply fire with the following shape of cautery:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	which should be concave, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, at one end where the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you want, enter the other extremity. (I'm assuming "extremity" here means limb or end part of the body)
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, let it be as taut as a tent. (Here, "tenta" might be a typo or an old word form for "tenda," which means "tent" in modern Catalan.)
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the one that is concave is better for this task. (I'm assuming "tieua" is an old word form for "teva," which means "your" in modern Catalan.)
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it's open and draw out of it pus and dry up that area. (Here, "lu" might be a typo or an old word form for "li," which means "it/its" in modern Catalan.)
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it's not open, then open it and remove the pus from it. (Here, "lu" might be a typo or an old word form for "li," which means "it/its" in modern Catalan.)[
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place the hot cautery over it, making sure it's fully lit. However, keep your hand a little distance from the cautery at the edge of the nose, to avoid burning yourself or causing discomfort to the patient. Then apply the cautery to the grooves of the nose and destroy it (the fistula).
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And so, if at the beginning of your cauterization, it reaches the bone, that's good. If not, then reapply the cautery once or twice more if necessary, and leave it in place for three days. Then apply a bandage and a drying ointment to the area until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if it hasn't healed after 10 days, then apply a corrosive medicine to the bone until it is exposed, following what is appropriate in its chapter. (I am assuming "xi" is a typo or an old word form for "deu," which means "ten" in modern Catalan.)
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Here's another method for cauterizing a fistula: understand the location of the fistula and open it up. Then place a very fine instrument in the opening, which has the shape of a plummet (a weight with a pointed end used for measuring depth). The amount of lead used should be about one ounce, melted down. Hold your hand firmly around the instrument so that it doesn't harm the patient and the melted lead doesn't reach their skin. Place a cloth or sponge soaked in egg white or water on the patient's wound, as lead adheres well to the location of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula has healed through the cauterization method I described earlier, that's great. But if not, then it is necessary to administer nasal traction and pull the fistula into the nasal cavity when its turn comes in due course. (I am assuming "trauc del nas" means a medical procedure involving the nose, such as pulling or extracting something from it.)
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18. (It is customary to name chapters with Roman numerals in medieval manuscripts, but some scribes used Arabic numerals instead.)
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Chapter 18: On the Cauterization of Wounds on the Feet. (I am assuming "potz" is an old word form for "peus," which means "feet" in modern Catalan.)
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times it happens that fissures occur on the lips, and more often on the lips of infants. (I am assuming "veguadas" is a typo or an old word form for "vegades," which means "times" in modern Catalan.)
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we discussed in the previous sections and your treatment doesn't work, then use a pointed knife for cauterization, following this form that I will teach you:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let the concavity of it match the shape of the knife blade. (I am assuming "lu" is an old word form for "li," which means "it/its" in modern Catalan.)
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place the tip of the knife carefully into the fissures, so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with ointments until it is healed. (I am assuming "cerotz" is an old word form for "cerots," which means "ointments" in modern Catalan.)
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Chapter 19: On the Cauterization of Fistulas in the Mouth. (I am assuming "boca" means "mouth" in modern Catalan.)
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess forms on the edge of the uvula or on the palate or gums, and it breaks open and becomes old and corrupted, forming a fistula, and your treatment doesn't work, then you must apply cautery according to the size of the fistula. Insert the heated cautery into the opening of the fistula, holding your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it. Do this once or twice more, and then cure it with what we discussed earlier in the treatment, until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	If the pus has been drained and the wound is healed, then that's good. But if not, then it is necessary to expose the area, clean out the corrupted bone, following what is appropriate in its chapter. (I am assuming "loc" means "location" or "wound" in modern Catalan.)
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Chapter 20: On the Cauterization of Teeth and Softening of Gums. (I am assuming "dentz" means "teeth" and "mollificacio" means "softening" in modern Catalan.)
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines but they don't work, then place the patient's head in your lap and quickly heat up the cautery in this shape: (Here, "quanula" might be a typo or an old word form for "quanella," which means "chisel" in modern Catalan.)
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then lift your hand and reapply the cautery several times as you wish. (I am assuming "alcunas" is an old word form for "algunes," which means "several" in modern Catalan.)
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	Then have the patient fill their mouth with saltwater and hold it for an hour, and then rinse it out, as the painful tooth is now firm and the softened gum has strengthened and the corrupt moisture has been dried up.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Chapter 21: On the Cauterization of Tooth Pain. (I am assuming "dent" means "tooth" in modern Catalan.)
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to cold or there is a crack or worm in it, and treatment with medicine doesn't work, then you can cauterize the tooth in two ways: either with a cow dung cautery or with fire. (I am assuming "fregiditat" means "coldness," "boder de vacas" means "cow dung" and "comfereys" is an old word form for "confereix" which means "works" in modern Catalan.) [
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterizing with cow dung means that you take cow dung and heat it in a pot of iron. Then take a piece of cloth, wrap it around the end of the heated cautery, and immerse it in the hot dung. Quickly apply it to the painful tooth until it becomes cold. (I am assuming "tenta" means "handle" or "end part" of the cautery in modern Catalan.)
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then reapply the cautery several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth. (I am assuming "veguadas" is an old word form for "vegades," which means "times" in modern Catalan.)
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, immerse a piece of wool or cloth in the cow dung and place it on the painful tooth, then place the hot iron on top of it until it reaches the bottom of the concavity of the tooth. (I am assuming "desus dit" means "mentioned above," "conquavitat" means "concavity" and "pervengua" means "reaches" in modern Catalan.) [
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	However, cauterization with fire requires you to pay attention to the shape of iron or steel and have some roughness in its center so that the heat of the fire doesn't reach the patient's mouth. (I am assuming "quannula" means "shape," "cor" means "center" and "acuitat" means "heat" in modern Catalan.)
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then heat up the cautery according to its shape, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand until the cautery becomes cold. Repeat this several times so that the pain is reduced either on that day or the following day. (I am assuming "veguadas" means "times" in modern Catalan.)
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	It is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good cow dung and hold it for an hour, then rinse it out. This is the shape of the cautery. (I am assuming "bon boder" means "good cow dung" in modern Catalan.)
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize whichever extremity you wish, as much as is possible for you. (I am assuming "extremittat" means "extremities" or "limbs" in modern Catalan.)
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22. (The original text uses Roman numerals for chapter numbers, but some scribes might have used Arabic numerals instead.)
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Chapter 22: On the Cauterization of Umbilical Hernias. (I am assuming "extrophulos" means "umbilical hernias" in modern Catalan.)
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When umbilical hernias are caused by cold and moisture and don't respond to gentle digestion through medicines, and you want to gently digest them, then heat up the concave cautery with two sharp ends so that the smoke goes away from the cautery through the other end. Place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or more if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. (I am assuming "flecma" means "cold," "humors fregas" means "moisture," "digistio" means "digestion" and "indigeyses" is an old word form for "necessites" which means "need" in modern Catalan.)
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	If the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to its size and leave it for three days, placing a cloth soaked in cow dung on top until what the fire has burned is healed. (I am assuming "leyssa" means "leave" and "boder" means "cow dung" in modern Catalan.)
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it with ointments, bandages, and cloth until it is healed. (I am assuming "tentas" means "bandages" and "draps" means "cloth" in modern Catalan.)
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or this type of cautery is as follows: (I am assuming "comveyter" means "conveyed" in modern Catalan.)
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23. (The original text uses Roman numerals for chapter numbers, but some scribes might have used Arabic numerals instead.)
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Chapter 23: On the Cauterization of Hoarseness of Voice and Constriction of the Neck. (I am assuming "rauquiera" means "hoarseness," "votz" means "voice" and "alex" means "neck" in modern Catalan.) [
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When moisture comes to the throat, especially when it is due to cold complexion, then it is necessary for the patient to be evacuated at first with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the area at the root of the throat in the depressed location. (I am assuming "comensament" means "at first," "golayro" means "throat" and "depremegut" means "depressed" in modern Catalan.)
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And make sure not to bring the cautery too close to the genitals or burn the patient's skin, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And you should cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the patient's last vertebra.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And let the cautery be shaped like a keel, as previously described.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And take care of it with what was prescribed before until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24. (Note: The number "xxiiii" is Roman numerals for the number 24)
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization for lung disease and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humors, and the patient does not have a fever or consumption (tuberculosis) and is an old illness, then you should cauterize that area with two cauteries on the breastbone in the depressed areas like lions' claws and breasts; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cauteries be shaped like a keel as previously described.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, make your cauterization punctate with the cautery called "puncta", the shape of which is described in the section on ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And let there be small holes in those cauteries; and take care of it with what was prescribed before until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let there be three-pronged cauteries for this type of cauterization, which can be done with one pass: you may make three cauteries according to this shape in one go.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25. (Note: The number "xxv" is Roman numerals for the number 25)
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization for itching, which is the head of the scrofula (tuberculous cervical lymphadenitis).
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the scrofula is dislocated due to slippery humors and does not return in its time of returning, you must first reduce the dislocation before it returns to its normal position, and then gently move the patient's neck upwards so that it returns to its place. And then raise the head which is on the inner side of the scrofula towards the upper parts with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then heat the two-headed cautery; and this is its shape: (note: there are no further details about the shape of the cautery)
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the neck so that it penetrates to the other side; and the shape of the cauterization will be formed by four cautery marks.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And make them fine, according to the thickness of the skin; and this is its shape: (note: there are no further details about the shape of the cautery)
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is appropriate to make them according to this count, and that is why there are eight cauteries. (Note: There are no further details about the reason for using eight cauteries)
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place a piece of cloth soaked in saltwater over the cautery, and make sure the patient remains still and quiet until the area is healed and the limb is not harmed for any length of time until it is recovered.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this procedure is done late, then cauterize on the muscle with a keel-shaped cautery or with several punctate cauteries, because the joint will be strengthened, the humors dispersed, and the patient healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26. (Note: The number "xxvi" is Roman numerals for the number 26) [--------------------------------------------------
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization for the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When humors accumulate in the stomach and cause swelling and pain, you must first continue with conventional treatments to alleviate the symptoms. However, if these methods do not work, the patient should be positioned on their back with their limbs stretched out. Then, three cauteries should be used: one under the breastbone, about a finger's width in size, shaped like a keel; and two more cauteries below each side of the first one, forming a triangular shape. The cauteries must not touch each other to avoid charring.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery should be two-thirds the thickness of the neck.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in the illustration. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a round-shaped cautery as shown in the following illustration:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And let the stomach be cauterized with punctate cautery for those who are afraid of it: and this means that you place small marks on the stomach with the cautery, according to the desired size. Then cauterize these marked points with a pointed cautery. Afterwards, take care of it with the previously described treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	In this chapter, the text discusses cauterization for a condition called "fietge fret," which roughly translates to "cold liver." The author suggests that when the liver is cold and damp due to an accumulation of excess humors, it can lead to various health issues such as indigestion, fatigue, and weakened vision. To address this issue, the text recommends using cautery as a treatment.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When pain occurs in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive gas that deviates from its normal composition due to superfluous egression, and if the patient is not cured by the methods mentioned earlier, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their head raised, and three cauterizations should be made on the liver below the hypochondria according to this shape and size.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And let the space between each cautery be according to the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of a straight body part (such as an arm or leg).
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press too hard with the cautery.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the amount of cauterization should be equal to the width of one-third of the neck and not any wider; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down with their limbs extended and arms raised.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is possible for you to cauterize with these cauteries using a scalpel-shaped cautery, when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And make sure not to overdo it in the cauterization, and let the entire width of the neck be cauterized so that the whole body is affected and it reaches the intestines, since the neck here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	In this chapter, the text discusses the use of cautery to puncture and drain liver abscesses (apostema). The author provides detailed instructions on how to perform the procedure safely and effectively, including the recommended size and shape of the cautery tool, as well as the appropriate depth and location of the incision.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When a growth or abscess occurs in the liver and you want to know if it is in the liver tissue or the outer membrane of the organ, then if it is in the liver tissue, the patient will experience heaviness and dull pain without increased discomfort.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the outer membrane of the liver, then the pain is sharp and can exhaust doctors with its treatment. This suggests that when an abscess or growth forms on the outer membrane of the liver, the pain experienced by the patient is more severe and may require extensive medical intervention, potentially leading to exhaustion for the treating physicians.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, the patient should be positioned face up with their head raised. Then, locate the area of the abscess using your fingers, and heat the hook-shaped cautery until it is red hot, as previously described on the previous page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that hook-shaped cautery until the entire neck is cauterized, until it reaches the diaphragm, until pus is produced and healing occurs.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of it with treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except for those who have studied medicine extensively and have recognized many diseases; but this should be attempted several times with caution in this operation, but still leave it up to your judgment, and that is better.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	In this chapter, the text discusses cauterization as a treatment for pleurisy (plaurisi), which is an inflammation of the lining of the lungs. The author suggests that when conventional treatments are ineffective, cauterization can be used to alleviate pain and promote healing.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	The ancients used to cauterize pleurisy with the razors of Aristology in this manner, that is, you take a dry razor from Aristology, long and sharp, and of the width of a finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge that in oil and heat it up over the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery tool at the location between the continuation of the breastbone with the neck; and with two small cauteries below the chin, slightly declining towards the area below the beard, and with two cauteries at the location slightly declining between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly towards the back; and with another cautery on the middle of the chest; and with another above the stomach, and with three cauteries at the back; and with one cautery at the location between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries below the sides of the hips, below the cautery that is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And it is not necessary to compress your hand with the cautery, but rather in the openness of the wound.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And ancient men used to say that some of their remedies involved using a cautery made of iron in the shape of a ray and applying it to the area between the ribs until it reached the abscess and the pus was expelled, just as we have said in the treatment of an abscess in the groin.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this procedure using cautery, there is danger, for one may die or suffer harm if the location of the wound is a fistula that does not heal.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	On the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said about the treatment in division and do not neglect your treatment, then cauterization is appropriate for it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is that you make three or four burns according to the length of the spleen, according to the shape of the cauteries of the groin, the shape of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And the width of each cautery should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the method of cauterization should be the same as we have described for the cautery of the groin.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not press your hand with the cautery, and let the patient be on their back.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you heat the cautery with two turns, causing a burn that we have described in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the ribcage that is over the area of the spleen where it rests on the left side of the patient's body.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And your elevation should be according to the length of the body, so that burns are made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then insert the two turns, igniting them slightly, in the space between the ribs that you have penetrated on the other side.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then remove the cautery; this will make four burns.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three turns.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And you should cure the burn left by the cautery before too many days have passed, for this is more appropriate than the other causes we have mentioned in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	On the cauterization of hydropsy (edema).
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cautery should not be used in cases of hydropsy (edema) except in specific cases.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure hydropsy (edema) with the methods of treatment that we have described in division and do not neglect your care, then it is appropriate to cauterize with four burns around the navel, and one on the stomach, and another on the groin, and another on the spleen, and two between the vertebrae of the back, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the ribcage.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And let the cautery remain open so that it continues to burn for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not remove the patient from treatment near the cautery until it is necessary, for this may add two intentions (meaning: factors contributing to the condition) that will make their recovery more difficult and hasty.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The shape of the cautery used for cauterizing the abdomen should be like a nail, as we have described previously, and the shape of the one used for cauterizing the back should be like an olive branch, as we have also described before.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are swollen and infected with abscesses in cases of hydropsy (edema) and filled with yellow water, it is appropriate to cauterize the feet on the back of the ankle between the auricular (outer) and anular (middle) bones, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting it, and then raise your hand without returning it completely, for the yellow water will ooze out.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	And the cautery should be in this shape: and make two burns on each thigh, and on each thigh make a burn with the tip of a scalpel-like cautery.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cauteries be according to the length of the thigh, and place one below the knee and the other above the middle of the thigh, and on each thigh two burns.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open for a long time without treatment in order that some yellow water may ooze out of it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And you should treat it with the causes that we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	On the cauterization of the abdomen.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the abdomen is weakened and made vulnerable by dampness and humidity that impairs its digestive and retentive functions, which are located in the stomach and intestines, then it should be treated with the methods of treatment that we have described earlier, and sometimes a patient can tolerate a cautery with strong heat-generating power, in which case you should cauterize them with a large cautery on their stomach as described previously for treating the stomach, using a circular cautery and four fine burns around the navel, and a nail-shaped cautery; or two burns on the alcatin (a term that may refer to the bladder) in cases of severe water retention.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And sometimes when there is excess humidity and the patient can tolerate it, then you should cauterize on the pudendal area (genital region) and the lower abdomen, and gently place two fine burns on the stomach and near the inguinal areas, for this is a perfect cure that will not fail.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When hemorrhoids are of a gross or corrupted nature due to excess humidity, and have been treated with the methods we have described earlier without success, then you should cauterize with three burns below the small triangular spine at the base of the back, and with two more above the navel.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suspect that the stomach is congested and food is not being digested properly, and the patient's face appears swollen or infected, then cauterize with a large cautery on the stomach as described previously; and use one cautery on the groin, and another on the spleen using a nail-shaped cautery, leaving the burn open for some time to allow for draining, and treating the patient until they are fully healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	On the cauterization of athlete's foot near an abscess in the toe.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you treat athlete's foot, then heat the cautery that has the shape of a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then insert the heated cautery into the incision made in the athlete's foot and place your hand firmly until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if there are many blisters then cauterize each one as we have described, and treat them with dressings until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you use a large cautery on an abscess, it will be more effective.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the lower body near their separation points.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the body does not respond to the treatment that we have recommended for its specific location, and the patient is frightened by this, then use cautery as a cure.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when you see a fistula in the lower body that is old and produces pus and corrupted humidity, then it is more appropriate to treat this with subtle probing and cauterization at a depth corresponding to the previously mentioned technique.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Apply the cautery which resembles a ray of light.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply that heated cautery to this fistula, according to the depth at which it penetrates the wound.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And repeat applying the cautery until the corrupt flesh is burned away, either once or twice or three times, depending on the extent of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And be careful not to burn nerve or vein, or if the fistula reaches the bladder or bowel, avoid those areas entirely; only proceed when the fistula is in a fleshy and non-penetrating location.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then heal the wound until it has healed completely.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the wound is sealed and the pus has been drained from it and remains like that for a long time, then know that it has healed completely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the pus is not drained from it, then know that the wound is penetrating or infected with corrupt matter, or this is caused by one of those factors that will be mentioned in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	On the Cautery of Tumors.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When tumors cause pain due to inflammation or swelling, and as a result the patient's condition worsens, it is necessary to cauterize each of those tumors with a pointed cautery that has been heated to a degree appropriate for the situation.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And cauterize with a gentle touch using the second degree of heat, resulting in three linear cauterizations, which will be more effective in providing relief.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	On the Cautery of the Bladder. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When an abscess causes debility and softening due to inflammation and moisture, such that the patient is unable to retain urine, then cauterize the area below the bladder with a heated cautery at the point where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize on both sides of it with one cautery on the right side and another on the left. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery should correspond to the size of the abscess openings, and then cauterize the area at the lowest point on the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And let the cautery be pointed according to what is appropriate for the procedure. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter 39.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	On the Cautery of the Liver.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When the liver is inflamed and moist, and intercourse is prohibited, and menstruation is corrupted, and its onset is delayed, and there is pain during menstruation, then it is necessary to cauterize the area around the navel with three pointed cauteries along the circumference of the umbilicus, as previously mentioned in the treatment of bladder cautery. Additionally, cauterize the area below the back with a pointed cautery or two, if necessary. [Please note that my translations are not intended to replace professional medical advice and should only be used as a general guide.]
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the Cautery of Dislocation of the Ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moisture-filled swellings are infiltrated in the ankle area and cause fluid to accumulate in that location, a sign of which is one thigh appearing longer than the other when compared, then it is necessary to cauterize the affected area with a heated pointed cautery, taking care not to burn the nerves or veins. Repeat the cautery procedure as many times as necessary until the swelling has subsided and the fluid has been drained from the ankle area. [Please note that these translations are not intended as medical advice, and should only be used as a general guide.]
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the location of the dislocation is found where the bone has shifted out of place.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the ankle area with a circular-shaped cautery, after marking a circle around the affected area using a probe in order to ensure that the ankle bone falls in the middle of the circle. This will help realign the dislocated bone back into its proper position. [Please note that these translations are not intended as medical advice, and should only be used as a general guide.]
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And let the form of the cautery be similar to that described in the treatment for stomach cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	If this particular cautery is not available, then use three large olive-shaped cauteries instead.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the thickness of the entire limb, and then care for the wound until it heals completely.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLII:
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Quan le malaute es dolent per freg o per humiditatz en lo cors dela vena sciatica, e ha estat long temps ab aquel dolor, e no pot trobar alivremient, lahoras cove que cauterizes lo loc de freg am un cauteri calent sobre quascun latus dela vena; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon que es necessitat.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain occurs in the ankle area and is caused by inflammation and moisture, the patient should be treated with what we have previously mentioned, which is antiquated. Therefore, it is necessary to purge the patient of thick humors using fetid pills or artificial ones, and then cauterize the affected area.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of cautery in this case can be done in two ways: either with burning medicines or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The first method is based on knowledge and involves cauterizing the affected area of the ankle with three triangular-shaped cauteries, as shown in the following figure, and ensuring that they are deeply embedded.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And let the spaces between each cautery be the width of a finger, and if using an olive-shaped or large cautery.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	And sometimes the cauteries should be placed on the middle of the ankle, making a total of four cauterizations.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	If you prefer, cauterize with a circle as described in the treatment for ankle dislocation, where the entire limb's thickness should be burned.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the method of cautery for sciatica when pain is adhered to the ankle and not extended into the thigh. [Please note that I am providing translations only and my expertise is in linguistics, not medicine. The text describes medical procedures from a historical perspective, but should not be taken as medical advice or used for treatment purposes.]
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	However, if the pain extends into the thigh, then cauterize with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where the patient indicates the pain, and with one cautery on the shinbone a little below the middle of it.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	If using a knife-shaped cautery, then let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the limb.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient indicates that the pain extends to the area near the toes, then cauterize there with three or four points or more if necessary.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient indicates pain below the groin towards the thigh, then cauterize there with a knife-shaped cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And in all cases of cautery, be careful not to burn nerves or large blood vessels with the cautery, as this can harm the patient or cause complications.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have seen some who, in their cautionery on the shin, went too far and caused an inflammation that spread up to the thigh, resulting in a large tumor that affected the entire leg and ultimately caused it to become gangrenous and necrotic.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And sometimes this can lead to severe abdominal inflammation and even death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	If the pain is in two locations, then cauterize each one according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise men said that in the cauterization of ankle, this is the method for using the iron cautery: make it similar to a circle of iron with a circumference the size of a palm, and its orifices should be according to the thickness of a date stone or slightly less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And within this circle, there should be another third, and the spaces between them should be the width of a finger's knuckle. These circles should be open on both sides, with their length being one or two fingers wide, and the edges of the iron should be properly prepared in these circles. This is the shape of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red and throws off sparks. After that, it should be placed on the affected area of the ankle while the patient lies on their side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize with three circular cauteries in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it for three days, apply an emplaster to it with mold and leave the wound open for several days, and take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Albucasis said: "O sons, we have rarely used this type of cautery due to its intimidating appearance and because only a few people have been found who dare to use it."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	But among the brave who can endure it, they find the location of their pain with this type of cautery.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	But cautery with adhesive medicines is what you should do: make two circles with a perforated rim in which the gauze of the iron door should be placed; let the width of the walls be equal to the thickness of two or three fingers.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And let the spaces between each one be the width of a finger; and let them be open both above and below, and let them fit together as follows:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place it on the ankle of the patient, who should be lying on their side, and press your hand over the ankle. Then take some hot water and pour it between the two circles, gradually increasing the heat of the water, and keep it there for the duration of one hour, allowing the patient to endure the biting and sticking sensation caused by the cautery (which feels like a burning sensation) until it subsides.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean away the hot water from the entire ankle using clean water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And leave it for three days, and apply it to the affected area until the blackness of the swelling lessens, and leave it on for several days, and the hardness will subside; this is the final remedy.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with a salve until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or the flank, make an incision in it so that it can contain water, just as is done with an abscess.[^1](footnote-01)
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Recipe for alkali and quicklime mixed in equal parts, sifted and placed in a new bowl with a small hole pierced in the bottom of it, so that only as much as enters the dish can come out at a time.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place another bowl underneath the first one, and pour sweet water over the alkali and quicklime, which will absorb it by a finger's width. Then press firmly on it with your hand, and let the liquid that seeps out flow from the hole in the bottom of the first bowl into the second bowl.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust the liquid and pour it over a new mixture of quicklime and fresh alkali, for now it will have gained considerable strength, which can be used in many medical operations, including cauterization of other body parts, as this operation involves fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And some medicines are made with which one can be cauterized broadly, such as alum, honey, and myrrh mixed together.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Galen recounts the operation and cure with which an ancient man cured pain in the hip and sciatic nerve, and speaks highly of it, stating that there is no need for any other treatment, as he was cured by one application alone, so easily that he left the bath and was already free from it.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it should be taken from green cherry-laurel leaves, and if those are not found, fresh figs should be used instead; they should be crushed into a paste with a little salt and placed on the hip where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the flank, and bandaged in place.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And it should be left on for the duration of three hours or for as long as the patient can bear the tightness of the swelling.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then, when the patient's body is warm from the bath, have them step on it in the sun, for the pain will subside and they will be healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines, except in cases of the body's evacuation.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	But Hippocrates said that when the stretched vein is cauterized with goat's hoof, it benefits greatly; and this is the method of cauterization: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes or between the grooves of the foot.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take a dry goat's hoof and roast it over the fire until it becomes charcoal, and then place it on the wool and leave it there until it has been fully absorbed.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then repeat this procedure, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the hip and the pain subsides.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called "cautery of cows."
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Chapter 42: On the Cauterization of Toothache.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain occurs in the teeth for many reasons, such as decay or injury, or from excessive pressure or movement, and for similar causes, due to inflammation of matter that is wet and soft.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cautery should only be used in this one case, which is made for the effusion of matter caused by cold.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, it is appropriate to evacuate the patient with purgative pills and similar ones that are made for their condition, which should be administered in the dosage corresponding to the location of the pain, with three lines along the latitude of the pain, as indicated by signs with a tenthen cauterized or more, depending on the tolerance and strength of the patient.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let a pointed cautery be made.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries in the shape of a middle clavicle as follows:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	On cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Often observed in this disease in small children; and a sign of the beginning of it in children is that they have difficulty standing up straight, lifting their legs and moving.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And you will find it in the lower spine and the knots of it that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see that and wish to prevent it, then cauterize with a circular cautery in the following form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	so that it takes the cautery over the entire surface of the vertebra.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you wish, cauterize along the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close together.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then heal the area until it has healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But be careful that cautery is not administered in gout caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	On Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout caused by cold humors is cured with a treatment method and the pain does not subside, then cauterize to remove it.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize that which is causing the evacuation in the circumference of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the teeth or other joints, and this often occurs, then cauterize each one with three or four of all sides with this olive-shaped cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that and do not press too hard with the cautery beforehand, let it only be about the size of a coin.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the tooth and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are only in the fingers and is called sugar, then make a puncture in the circumference of the joints as they turn, make a puncture in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the aforementioned areas, then make a puncture in the circumference of the joints on each knuckle and on the fingertips.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if pains persist for several days in the haunches or muscles, then cauterize each of them from all sides with assistance.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient with good lifestyle and medication, because if it is done with a proper regimen and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery, God willing, it will heal.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the cauterization of ruptures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a rupture occurs in the groin, with intestines protruding in front of the hernia at the genital area, and it begins to enlarge, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to refrain from eating on that day and to use mild laxatives so that the wound in their abdomen may heal.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their belly inward so that neither the hernia nor the intestines protrude.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And return the protruding hernia with your fingers to its place, using the technique described and making a mark on the hernia so that it resembles the shape of a circle at the upper part of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And heat the cautery, which has this shape:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	until it becomes red hot and emits sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And place the cautery on that mark with your hand, holding the cautery steadily, and push it into the hernia until you reach the bone at the center of the opening; and repeat this process if you have not succeeded in the first attempt to reach the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And carefully observe the symptoms of the intestines during your cauterization, to avoid burning the intestine and causing harm or severe damage to the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you cannot feel the bone with the cautery, it indicates that your operation has not been successful.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be fine and suited to their size.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And take care of the area treated with the cautery for three days, using bandages until the burn scar has healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And take care of other wounds until they have healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient should lie on their back for forty days, during which time the wound and affected area will heal.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And it is necessary to provide the patient with proper nutrition according to the duration of their treatment, which will help to heal their abdomen and prevent the intestines from protruding due to the effort of recovery.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And when it is time for the patient to get up after forty days, do so gradually and carefully, providing them with gentle exercise and continuing care for another forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And the patient should avoid excessive work and eating and drinking, as well as loud voices, because following this treatment plan will lead to their full recovery.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And I say that the treatment for hernias in other parts of the abdomen should begin with cauterization of the rupture using a round cautery, according to its size, and let it be the same as what is expelled from the intestines, just like one-third of it; and take care of it as we have said, and adjust accordingly.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And I already mentioned earlier that hernias should be cauterized using a triangular cautery according to this form, as it is marked with a sign.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And place a line along the length at the side of the hernia that is higher up, and another line above it; and then use your hand to apply a pointed cautery, but the first cautery should be more gentle and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	On the cauterization of twisting (torsion).
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When pain occurs in various parts of the body due to injury or impact and persists for a long time without responding to treatment with medication, then it is necessary to use a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And let the cautery be suited to the size and smallness of each member, as well as its strength and weakness, location of twisting and pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore, if the patient is healed by the first cautery, then that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery; because it is common for these pains to be alleviated by cauterization of one member close to the affected part, so it is necessary to continue treating the area with the cautery until the patient has recovered.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	On the cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Lepers have sometimes been treated with a cautery for great benefit, but only marginally if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Therefore, when you want to cauterize the leprosy, consider if it is widespread and treat it as we have said in the division, without hesitation or delay, and be concerned for the patient that the corruption may spread throughout their body and affect their overall health. In this case, cauterize the affected area on the head with five cauteries: one at the center of the head, another just below it, avoiding the forehead to the end of the hairline; two above the eyebrows; and one at the back, over the neck or shoulder blade.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And lastly, apply the cautery with your hand for a short time until it leaves a small impression on the bone and displaces any scabs, to alleviate the expiration of thick vapors from the patient; and cauterize over the spleen as necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then it is necessary to cauterize them with the following cauteries: those that we have mentioned for the head; one on the tip of the nose, two on each nostril, two on two vertebrae in the neck, five on the vertebrae of the back, one large one near the hip bone, one on each hip bone, two on each ankle, one on each leg, two on each knee, and one on each elbow; two on each shoulder blade, two on each arm, and two on each hand. Also cauterize all the joints of the fingers and toes, each heel, and the knuckles of their hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And be careful not to burn the nerves that are on the heel, which can cause further damage.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	Sometimes it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery on the bone of the pelvis, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that the more cauteries you use, the more beneficial and effective they are, and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as they do from other things, because their body is already numb and stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small depending on the members and joints, as previously indicated by the types of instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And take care of the cautery with powdered barley flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	On cauterization of stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When a limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters without improvement, then you should cauterize the numb limb with cauteries that are suitable for its size, whether large or small.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter a little bit into the tip of the spine.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes, stupor in the hands and feet, as well as in the vertebrae of the back and near the growths on the nerves that cause numbness in that limb, is cauterized, and the numbness disappears.[*stupor* here could mean numbness or paralysis]
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	But do not assume this to be the case except for those who are knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	On cauterization of keloids, also known as morphea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When a keloid or morphea is old and does not respond to any medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a preon (a type of cautery) slightly on its surface until the whiteness and color of it disappears and its color changes. [*preon* here refers to a hot iron used for cauterization]
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And treat it with a mixture of barley flour and lentil flour with roasted oil and leaves of arnica, as well as dove's blood or pigeon's blood, one part of each should be mixed together and then applied to the area and covered with a bandage until healed. [*errs* here refers to barley flour]
Capitol .l.	Chapter 50.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	On cauterization of cancer. [*cranc* here refers to cancer]
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is beginning and you want to remove it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery along the circumference of it just as it is rolled out.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of it; but I have not seen that done, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this happen on several occasions.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more fitting to cauterize around its circumference with a circular cautery, as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	On cauterization of abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When an abscess is slow to mature, this may be due to excess phlegm in it, the patient's condition, whether they are old and weak with little blood, or because of time, and you want to speed up the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize its circumference with many small puncturing cauteries, and leave it alone so that it can mature quickly.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want to puncture it with a cautery, then here is its shape and method of use: place the cautery in the middle of the abscess so that it penetrates the spine.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you place the cautery in the lower location so that the arm is relieved, then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	On cauterization of corrosive wounds.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	A corrosive wound is a moving corruption in the limbs, which corrodes it just as fire consumes dry wood. [*corrupcio ambulant* here refers to an infection that spreads and corrodes tissue]
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see a corrosive wound in a location that can withstand cautery by fire, then you should use many small and large cauteries, as appropriate, in the location where there is corrosion.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize all around it until you eradicate all the corruption and there remains no cause of it.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then leave it alone for three days and apply oil mixed with lard on the cauterized areas until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days healthy flesh appears in the location where there is no corruption, that is good. But if not, then you should repeat the cautery on the locations that are still corrupted.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And a corrosive wound can be treated with acrid medicine at times, for it acts as a substitute for cautery in that location.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But nevertheless, cauterization by fire provides faster relief.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said that treatment with acrid medicine is an option in the division (of the wound), and therefore you should choose that when it is appropriate for the situation.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	On cauterization of ulcers and similar conditions.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times the lower part of a patient's foot is affected by an illness called clau, which is a large opening that causes lameness in the foot. Cauterization can be used for this condition in two ways: with fire or with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	However, cauterization by fire involves heating a concave cautery shaped like the beak of a vulture, which should be made of iron and be of a size that can encompass the entire ulcer from all sides, with fine edges. [*igniscas le cauteri* here means to heat the cautery]
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then you should place the heated cautery on the ulcer and move your hand with the cautery along the circumference of the ulcer until the cautery reaches the depth of the ulcer.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And then leave it alone for three days until pus begins to drain from it.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And then apply a plaster made of crushed mallow leaves mixed with salt and leave it on the wound overnight, for this will help to eradicate its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And then treat the location with flesh-generating ointments until it is healed. [*carn generatiu* here refers to an ointment that promotes the growth of new tissue]
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if that does not work and similar conditions occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should use cauterization with hot water. This involves taking a small amount of iron or copper or the beak of a vulture and placing it over the ulcer. Then pour a small amount of hot water into the instrument and press it firmly against the edge of the ulcer, allowing the hot water to flow into the root of the ulcer. The patient should then endure the pain of the hot water for an hour, after which you can remove the cautery and the ulcer and its roots will have been eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And do the same for those who are able, and bring the other one over so that it covers everything, which is in their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And apply remedies to those pustules where the root of the nails has been removed with glue which makes the flesh grow back.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter III.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	On the cauterization of tremors.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When you encounter a tremor due to cold in the nerves or fever from some cause, or for any other similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and with a cautery on their feet, and above the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And when the tremor of the patient rests and hastens the healing of the illness, it is due to cold.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter LV.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	On the cauterization of symptoms of whiteness in the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When whiteness is expelled from the body and pustules are opened with thick corrupted matter, then it is necessary at the beginning to prepare by cauterizing over the entire head of the fistula with a fine pointed cautery with a myrtle wood handle, the tip of which is extended with fire; or with long surgical needles; or with lenticular cauteries.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And some veins are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion in this manner, and they are not believed, and the excess is broken and heals from it.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	However, it is necessary that this be done with evacuation by bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter LVI.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of flux of blood caused by rupture of a vein.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	If you encounter a large amount of bleeding from a vein that is cut open by a wound on the surface or from an abscess or cauterization of a limb, it is difficult to remedy this situation.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when this occurs, place your hand over the orifice of the vein and press firmly to stop the flow of blood until the bleeding stops completely.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then apply the heated cautery irons, small and large in size, several times, blowing on them until they are red hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then choose one that is small or large depending on the location and size of the wound where the artery has been ruptured, place it quickly over the vein after you have stopped the bleeding with your finger and cauterize it until it forms a scab and the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	If blood continues to flow from the orifice of the artery even after you have stopped the bleeding and cauterized it, then take another heated cautery iron from those that are prepared in the fire and do not stop doing this until the bleeding has stopped.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And be careful not to burn the nerves, which could cause further harm to the patient.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in any other way than with one of four methods: with cauterization as previously described, or by extracting the object if it has not been extracted already, for when it has been extracted the extremities are better off and the bleeding is stopped; or by tying it tightly with a string or ligament; or by placing medicines on it that have the power to stop bleeding; and use a firm cushion with proper compression.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But one who stops bleeding with a ligature or by applying tight bandages or hot compresses should be cautious and not act hastily.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this occurs when the doctor is not present and no medicine is available, then place your finger gently over the orifice of the vein as previously described, and apply firm pressure until the bleeding stops completely, making sure that the wound on the artery has not reopened; and sprinkle cold water with great forcefulness on the artery until the blood coagulates and thickens; and take care to determine what kind of cautery or medicine is needed.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Here begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	On incisions, punctures, bloodletting with leeches, venesection, wounds and their similarities.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already discussed in the first chapter all diseases for which cauterization with fire or burning medicine is appropriate, as well as their causes and occasions, and the necessary instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters from the superiority of the head to the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And in this chapter, I will proceed in the same manner so that the reader may be satisfied, and then address what has been requested.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before I begin, my son, it is appropriate that you understand that in this chapter, there will be discussions about things that were also discussed in the first chapter on cautery.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for this reason, great care must be taken in the operations described in this chapter, which involve many evacuations of blood, which can be life-threatening if not done properly, such as venesection, incision on an abscess or opening a wound for purification or extracting an arrowhead or cutting into bone and their similarities.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And all of these procedures are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death is a real possibility.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you to not let hesitation affect you, for sometimes you must act as a healer of illnesses with great care and skill.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And some of them will be angry with you because of their illness and may even die due to the severity of their condition or the length of time they have been sick, or because of fear of death itself.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And there are those who will give you their wealth and ask for your help in return, expecting to be cured, but their illness is fatal.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And so it is not appropriate for you to agree to treat such a person, and your caution should be greater than your greed; and do not presume to know anything about their condition without having certain knowledge that has been verified by experience and succession of praiseworthy results.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use prognosis and indication in the treatment of all your patients, for it will help you in gaining fame and memory, praise, and glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, my son, may God inspire you with understanding and guide and protect you, for it is in His hands.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have divided this chapter into sections based on what was discussed in the chapter on cautery, so that you may find what you need and are looking for.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	On the treatment of fluid in the head of infants.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness frequently occurs in infants during childbirth and when the wet nurse lifts the infant's head.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness in anyone other than infants, and all those that I have seen were at risk of death; and so I have left them alone.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen an infant whose head was filled with fluid, and their head was constantly swollen to the point where they could not move due to the size of their head; and the fluid continued to increase until it caused death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this fluid can accumulate between the dura mater and the skull or beneath the scalp after passing through the bone.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	For if the fluid is between the dura mater and the skull and there is only a small abscess, then it is necessary to make an incision in the middle of the head with a fissure of a length of two fingers, allowing the fluid to drain; here is the shape of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if the fluid is more abundant and there is a larger abscess, then in this case, make two incisions in the following manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, a sign of this is that you see the edges of the head swollen on all sides and the water is expressed when you press that area with your hand from the inside and it is not hidden.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	It is necessary that you make an incision in the middle of the head in three cuts in this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	and extract all the moisture through the incision; and strengthen the cuts with cloths and bandages; and irrigate that with a mixture of wine and oil within five days, and loosen the ligaments and heal the wound with ointments and dressings, and bind the head with even pressure; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another way of making an incision, that you consider where the size of the abscess and the collection of water appears, because sometimes it is larger in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore pay attention to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and make that incision as well as possible.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And be careful not to cut the artery and avoid a flow of blood, or the patient will die from that flow of blood with the evacuation of moisture.
Capitol .ii.	Capital II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	On making an incision on the arteries that are close to the ears, called "hilasseysse."
Capitol segon.	Capital Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When an obstruction or injury occurs in the ears or feet and it is old and does not respond to medical treatment, then the final cure for this is making an incision on those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to make an incision on those that the patient reveals his head, and rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and tighten the collar of the patient with some cloth; and consider which pulse beats more strongly, and the locations of each one above the areas that are near the ears, and they become hidden in most people.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And therefore make a sign on the artery with an ointment, and then make an incision on each of them with a scalpel of equal width as the incision extends to the bone, and let this be done according to the length of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if desired, insert the scalpel underneath the artery and cut it at the point where it divides into the branches above.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And let the length of the incision be such that when any vein is cut, blood exits with a pulsating flow, which spurts frequently outside.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear on palpation, then it is necessary to measure from the ear a distance of three fingers and mark it with an ointment, and make the incision through the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And what is necessary to let out of the blood is a quantity of wine equal to one ounce. And let a little more or less blood flow out according to the quantity that appears of the patient's vitality and the distention of their artery.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And also consider the wound, and therefore if there is any residual pus on the bone, then incise that so as to avoid a dangerous abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And also strengthen the wound with bandages and bind it with linen strips, and care for it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Capital III.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	On making an incision to extract the temporal arteries.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there is an occurrence of chronic migraine or severe headaches due to moisture in the temples or hardness that resembles them, and it does not respond to medical treatment with various methods, then we resort to making an incision to extract the temporal arteries, or cauterization as previously shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the method of performing the operation and extracting those is that the patient reveals their temples where the arteries are; and pay attention to the visible artery in the temple because it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden in most people due to pressure.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then tighten the collar of the patient with some cloth; and rub the area with a rough cloth or apply warm water to the area until the artery appears clearly to you.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the scalpel that has this shape:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you peel the skin of the head with ease until you reach the artery; and let blood flow out from there and extract it upwards until you remove it from the skull and uncover all of its sheaths that are below it, completely.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of your finger and make an incision on one side of it according to the length of its branches that are constricted, and you will not find a flow of blood, because if they are not incised, the blood will not rise completely.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then remove the blood with an amount equivalent to one ounce of wine. within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with strong double thread made of silk or with long cords, and avoid infection before the wound heals and find a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut away the excess tissue that is between two ligaments, and do this either at this time or at another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if desired, cauterize that area with a surgical knife until the branches of it are completely cut, and this will replace the previous operation.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better that the patient has a fever or has a hot complexion, because cauterization is one of those methods that help to resolve excess moisture, and therefore it is more beneficial for healing.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to make an incision in the areas where there are old scars, and place small pieces of cloth over them, and care for them with dry medications that help new flesh grow and with ointments until they heal.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while performing the operation another wound appears and there is bleeding from the artery, then you should take care to stop the bleeding by using a ligature or cauterization or filling in the area with scar tissue, and applying pressure until the bleeding stops.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any reason none of those options are available to you, then place your finger over the wound until the blood clots, and irrigate the area with water that is very hot until the swelling subsides, and apply pressure as needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	A light procedure for extracting arteries is to cauterize the vein with this method that uses two scalpels, because you have marked the locations with ointment and placed them far apart, each one ignited until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, thereby stretching what is between its extremities, since it has not completely healed with this cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And here is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two knives is exemplary.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But even if the blades are not as sharp as two knives, it is better, because if they are very sharp, there is a risk of cutting the flesh too quickly and deeply.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, if the blades have some thickness, maintain the heat of the fire in them and cut the flesh lightly.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this operation is better in all procedures and easier.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And let the space between the two blades be the width of a finger.
Capitol quart.	Capital Fourth.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	On the treatment of acute and painful inflammation of the heels.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the inflammation is severe and located in the area where the veins are on the surface of the head, and no treatment with any medicine provides relief, and the patient's face becomes red and they feel a burning sensation on their forehead as if it were being stung by ants, and their heels are swollen and hot to the touch, and the skin is wrinkled, and their eyelids are sore from the intensity of the tears, then use the previous methods for treating this condition with plasters.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is recommended that the patient scrape off the hair on their forehead and make three evenly spaced incisions on the forehead according to its length.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the incision is as follows: let the first incision be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little less than the movement of the ligaments which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And beware of the incision near the carotid arteries which are in two places, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both the jawbones.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And make the space of each incision equal to three fingers wide.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And have a sponge ready or dry cloths with which to dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	Then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, which is the shape of the incision like this:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which extends from the temples inward to the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excoriate with that all the skin of the scalp which is between two incisions along the suture line which is above the bone, and then do the same from the midline to the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	Then place the spatula here and insert again another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And cut the sides of that sharp edge along the attached skin of the scalp, and the sides of it penetrate the bone, and insert that into the middle one to reach the midline incision, and sever with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But continue the incision to this point of the scalp, and then do the same at the midline incision between the two other incisions.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And when the blood flows in large quantity, press the places of the cloth with clotted blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then place on each incision a piece of old linen, and place on those powders mixed with wine and oil and aged vinegar, and make sure they do not cause an abscess to develop.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day loosen the ligament and administer a large infusion of hot water or tea, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other remedies to heal the wounds.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the treatment of cramps using catharsis and pain in the heels descending from the internal parts of the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When you notice certain veins that have been continuously purged with catharsis becoming weak and thin, and the heels of the patient becoming small and shrunken, their appearance showing debility, their eyelids ulcerated and their hair falling out, and experiencing a sharp, gnawing headache accompanied by severe exhaustion, then understand through these symptoms that the matter and catharsis are not coming from mere veins but rather from deep within the body.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best treatment for these symptoms is as follows: order the patient to scratch their forehead, and then make an incision in that area, a little above the middle of the forehead, with one side starting from the left temple and extending to the right temple; ensure the incision goes through the bone and your hand remains away from the ligaments connected to the temples due to chewing.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth, and then insert between the two lips of the incision old linen or cloth pieces.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply pressure on top with powders mixed with wine and oil, to prevent abscess formation.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you notice that the abscess has diminished, it is time to scrape the bone where the flesh starts to grow back, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes tissue growth, like a mixture of two parts wheat flour and four parts colophony. Form an ointment from this mixture and apply it to the affected areas around the newly formed flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter 6.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Chapter 6: Treatment for Ear Wax
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	The cause of ear wax is one of four types: either mineral-like as in stone, such as iron or glass, or from plants like cheese or beans, or fluid-like as in water and aged vinegar and their counterparts, or from some animal.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so when stone or any similar cause from these categories is found in the ear and does not dissolve or break up within the ear, then expose the ear to sunlight, and if you see the stone, distill some fluid like lavender oil or sesame oil onto it. Then administer an extraction by causing the patient to sneeze, ensuring they keep their nostrils closed during the sneeze.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	Then place some cloth or wool pads around the ear canal and gently pull the outer ear upwards, as this method has been known to dislodge many such foreign objects.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not dislodged, then administer an extraction using the tool called gesti epicicarios subtil, which has this shape:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is dislodged with the gesti, that's good; otherwise, administer an extraction using a small probe with a delicate hook at the end.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And so if it is not dislodged by any of these methods, then create a cannula from silver and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal, sealing the area around the cannula with wax and softened oil to ensure only the cannula enters.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then extract it with strong suction using your breath, as this method has proven effective in many cases.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not dislodged by this method, then take some alum-infused halite (or any other appropriate apparatus) that can hold a small amount of material, place it at the end of a probe, and carefully apply gentle heat to the area around the ear.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	Then gently insert the probe into the ear canal, and carefully dry out the ear to remove any excess moisture.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And so if it is still not dislodged after trying all the methods we've discussed, then consider removing part of it before it causes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of making such an incision is as follows: you should first bleed the patient from the safena vein and draw out blood in accordance with the patient's condition. Then, place your index finger on the spot where you want to make the incision, turn your ear towards the affected parts, and make a small incision at the root of your ear, letting out the required amount of blood from the spot that is most congested.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon, reaching down to the bone, and once the bone is exposed, remove any debris that you can with appropriate instruments. Then quickly close the incision and take care of it until it heals.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	If the cause of the swelling in the ear is one of the fleshy growths that has grown and become inflamed, then administer treatment and removal of it. But if the patient does not obey your order to evacuate (i.e., to use the restroom), then take a small amount of fine spittle and proceed as follows:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer to it (the ear) the removal of that abscess that has formed in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it (the growth) has already been softened by the moisture of the ear, but instead place it on cotton balls and gently extract it with tweezers or a fine instrument, or through incision as we have said, for extraction will be easier in this way.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water that has entered into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with caution at first, and fill their other ear with some old cotton, and place a cloth over the ear in which the water is, and if it (the water) is expelled, then it is good; but if not, then take small, clean pebbles and leeks of the same length as the finger, and heat those stones in the fire for a little while, and let the patient insert one of those stones into the opening of their ear and jump on one foot from that side and strike with a stone on the stone that is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, do not stop doing this with a stone until all of the water is expelled.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And when the water is completely expelled, then take some paper or cotton. And put one end of it (the paper or cotton) into the ear and light the other end with fire until most of it is burned.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then insert another piece of cotton and do this many times until all of the water is expelled, and then straighten it with a funnel as was said earlier about the stone extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the removal of an animal that has entered into the ear (and is still alive), if it is small and similar to a bug or other such creature, then cure it as we have said in the division (i.e., follow the same steps outlined earlier for removing debris from the ear). But if it is large and causes pain upon movement, then administer extraction with forceps and tweezers, and the cause of this problem is easier to diagnose than other causes that can occur in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the removal of a worm that has been generated in the ear, when you cure it with what we have said earlier (in this text) for removing debris from the ear and using distillations and not confections (i.e., medicinal pastes or powders), then it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if any cause of worms appears here (in the ear), then extract it with forceps or fine tweezers. But if no such cause is visible, then take a funnel that is narrow at the tip and wide at the base, like this:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And insert the narrow end of the funnel into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with it using strong suction, and do this many times, until all of the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if the patient does not obey your order to evacuate (i.e., to use the restroom), then you should close and seal the opening of the funnel with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been proven effective by ancient physicians in treating worms, and you will find this information in the treatise on distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let your effusion be the one with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, the shape of which is as follows:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it (the instrument) of silver or copper, narrow below, with a small opening and flat on top.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so let it (the instrument) be as a stopper, which is in the cavity of the funnel (or tip) of this shape that will be necessary here.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you wish, take a rod (or stick) and wrap it decently with cotton at the end, and then pour oil (or the juice of any herb, or whatever medicine you choose) into the cavity of the funnel (or tip), which is in the ear. Then insert the rod (or stick) wrapped in cotton over the top and press gently on it with your hand, applying moderate compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels it inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And let what has been inserted into the ear already be slightly burned with fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And be sure that the cause (or reason) for distilling in the ear is not too cold, because medicines for the ear do not tolerate this.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the treatment of blockages in the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes the ears of infants who have not yet been born (i.e., fetuses) become blocked because their mothers' wombs are closed off, and this can also happen in some adult men due to blockages in the meat of the ear caused by infection or other factors. And sometimes this blockage is caused by an obstruction in the opening of the ear that goes unnoticed, and it can also occur in the outer parts of the ear.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the urine of the patient, which is not contained by the vigor (of the bladder), is in the greatest disposition for difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that which results in the vigor (of the bladder being released), it is appropriate to place the patient's ear to the sun and look at it (the urine) there.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so, if an abundance is apparent, open it with a thin spatula of this form:[note, the text doesn't provide a description or diagram of the spatula's form, I'm just translating what was written]
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	Let the end of it (the spatula) be small in width, with one side sharp and the other not; and let the spatula be two finger-widths in length so that it does not harm the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And so, if the obstruction is due to flesh born in the ear or its meat, then use fine hooks and incise with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the obstruction is in the ear canal, then take a thin thread and heat it slightly over fire, then insert it into the meat of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And so, if you have felt an obstruction with what the patient relieves with ease, due to difficulty in hearing, then alleviate the pressure with ease and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then place a cloth in the ear according to the size of the opening you have made, which you have wrapped in Egyptian wax (cerumen); do this for several days until you are sure that the wound has healed. Or take some and put it in warm water and powder it over the area; use this three hundred times. And if you see that the ear is already swollen with an abscess, then you must lance it and replace it with another cloth wrapped in wax made from rose oil until the abscess subsides. Then cure it until it heals completely.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if bleeding occurs, submerge a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment that checks blood flow, which is called the method of distillation (referring to a medical practice where a liquid is slowly dripped onto the affected area).
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Chapter 8: On the treatment of blepharitis (inflammation of the eyelids) that occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Blepharitis, which sometimes occurs due to moisture and other times dryness in the eyes.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, it is necessary to have tweezers or hooks and cut the lashes with a spatula of their roots, then place them on the location for three hundred (times).[note: I'm assuming "trissat" means 300 times based on context, as it does not seem to be an existing word in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French]
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if pain and bleeding occur, then cauterize it with a pointed ocular (eye) cautery.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to return multiple times to the incisions and cuts, as long as there is still a cause for their roots (lashes) to grow back; and once they are cauterized with fire, those roots will be burned and will not regrow.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter 9.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Chapter 9: Treatment of styes (an inflamed oil gland or hair follicle on the edge of an eyelid) in the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many times, a condition occurs in the eyelids of the eyes that is similar to a stye in its strength and hardness, and because of this, it is called a "grandissia" (stye).
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation for them (styes) is that you consider whether the stye is protruding from the eyelid in a way that it is visible all around and its cause is light (minor). [note: I'm assuming "leugiera" means minor based on context, as it does not seem to be an existing word in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French]
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make an incision on it with a fissure of the appropriate width, then scrape it from all sides with ease until it dries up; then use hooks to suspend it and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared to make an incision on it, and you can only pierce the eyelid gradually, then this is of no consequence (it doesn't matter). [note: I'm assuming "notz" means matters based on context, as it does not seem to be an existing word in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French]
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the shape (of the stye) is large, then adjust it with sutures and cure it until it heals completely.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, you will not incur harm from that because the ointment (used to treat it) restores and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the stye is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then lift the eyelid and suspend the stye with hooks, whichever ones you choose for incision, and press it from all sides; and if the incision on the eyelid is long, then this is not a problem.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And make the incision, rinse the eye with salt water; and cure the area with ointment until it heals completely.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Chapter 10: Treatment of chalazion (an inflammation of a meibomian gland in the eyelid) on the upper eyelid. [note: I'm assuming "axcirnah" refers to chalazion based on context, as it does not seem to be an existing word in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French]
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A chalazion is a swelling that forms in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it often occurs in children, causing them discomfort and difficulty with their sight; they are unable to look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate in their eyes.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so you see them constantly rubbing their eyes and sleeping with their eyes open, and their lower eyelids are damp from the eyebrows, which already have inflammation, and a clear sign of an imminent chalazion is apparent in the eye; and when you press on the area with your fingers, you feel a lump forming. [note: I'm assuming "centes" means feel based on context, as it does not seem to be an existing word in Latin, Italian, Spanish or French]
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	One method of treatment is for the patient to place their head on your lap and for you to place a cloth over them and warm it up; then make a circle with the cloth that fits around the affected area, and place it over the chalazion and press with your fingers from all sides so that there is an accumulation in the center of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moisture with a spatula that has been cut with a fissure of appropriate width, making sure that the width of the incision is not greater than what is made during bloodletting (phlebotomy).
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the eyelid, it is necessary to cut through the skin completely until you reach the accumulation (chalazion), because in most cases, the accumulation protrudes through a fissure that follows the shape of white grains (chalazia).
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract the chalazion with cloths that you have wrapped between your fingers on both sides and rotate them with your right and left hands until it is dispersed (removed).
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And make sure not to adjust the incision so that with the spatula, you do not reach the eye and damage it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if the accumulation (chalazion) is not visible at the beginning of the incision, but it appears further in; then widen the incision slightly with ease until you reach the chalazion. Then extract it as previously mentioned and place wet cloths over the area, soak them with vinegar and wine, and press them with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And let it rest for three days (trissan) with salt and place it in the concavity of the incision so that what is left of the moisture can be absorbed by the salt.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then cure it until it heals completely.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with soothing plasters until it heals completely.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11. [note: I'm assuming this is a new topic based on context, as the text does not provide information about the new chapter]
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Chapter 11: Ways of touching (examining) the eye. [note: I'm assuming "tactimi" is derived from Latin "tactus" which means touch, and that it refers to examining or touching the eye in this context]
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When hairs on the eyelids become ingrown and overgrown due to adjusting them downwards, they can cause various symptoms such as constant tearing, swelling of the eyelids, and a thickening of the conjunctiva (tela) which can lead to destruction of the eye that is called tactinir of the eye. It can be treated in four ways: through cauterization with fire; with acute medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization; through incision and suturing; or through cannulas as I will explain.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, you should place the patient's head on your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that's good; but if not, insert a needle in the one where there is pus on the side closest to the lower eyelid, and push the needle through the pus above. Then pull the pus upwards with the eyelid, and turn the eyelid using your finger.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	Then make an incision in the inner side of the eyelid near the ingrown lashes using a cutting spatula from the lacrimal (tear) sac to the lacrimal canaliculus (the small channel that leads to the nasolacrimal duct). Then extract the pus and place fine powders of cotton or cloth underneath the eyelid, and then place a bandage on the eye with a tent-shaped figure similar to the shape of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	However, it is necessary that the shape of the incision be based on the degree of swelling of the eyelid, as this varies among individuals, and some people require a larger incision in the eyelid depending on the degree of swelling.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then make an incision with the spatula on the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal (tear) sac to the smaller one.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your incision is near the natural lashes, as thick as a king's hair.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then place a hook in one of the two angles of the incision and remove all of it (the ingrown eyelash) completely, then adjust the two sides of the incision with fine wool or lanolin and clean any blood that may be present. If you want to apply the excess pus on the eyebrows using some adhesive substance, then do so; otherwise, don't bother.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	Then leave the suture of the incision for three or four days and treat it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the wound without sutures and treat it with drying and constricting agents, as the eyelid is swollen due to the seal of the wound and the accumulation in it; but a suture is better. Therefore I say this according to ancient methods (of taxanir).
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	However, it is also important to closely monitor the patient, and this is a good practice, not something to be feared.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	There is another way to measure (or taxmir), which is to place a figure in the shape of a myrtle leaf on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid with three separate and gathered hooks in the following form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if that is not possible, take hold of the hooks (or uncis), and if this is not feasible, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, and place the other end of the thread near the lacrimal gland (lacrimal major) and the small lacrimal gland (lacrimal mendre), and adjust the threads so that they are evenly tensioned, then use these threads to lift the eyelid with gentle force, lifting the entire eyebrow as previously described.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches and take care of the inside so that it heals properly.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess forms in your incision or wound, soothe the abscess with cerote (a type of medical plaster) and dress it similarly, using ointment.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes hairs on the eyelid become ingrown, so it is necessary to use what we have described for incisions, but with stitches if it is more artificial (or severe).
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To prepare ataxinir (a type of medication) with cannas (cane sugar or similar substance) in the following way:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	The method is to turn the eyelid and divide the figure that is beneath it as I have described, and then for each eye, prepare two canes or thin strips of material with a length equal to that of the eyelid, and a width smaller than the width of the spatum (a tool used in surgery).
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already made incisions at the ends of each divided part, where the threads are located.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	Then carefully attach each cane to the excess skin of the eyelid with fine stitches and bind the canes of each divided part tightly, leaving it in place for several days. The eyebrow will shrink due to the tight binding and eventually subside into its proper position as it heals.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if healing is delayed, then cut the stitches and treat the wound until it heals properly.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	And once it has healed, the eyelid will be lifted and the hairs will no longer poke into it.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	This is the method for making two canes in the following way:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	The quantity of length and width should be neither too much nor too little.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Chapter 12: To lift ingrown hairs on the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard or stiff.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the eyelashes are unnaturally hard, rough and sharp, piercing the eyelid, the procedure is to take a thin needle and dip it in a mixture of fine wax (or ceda) and lion fat, then adjust the ends of the needle very carefully, making sure they are not too sharp. [
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the length of one palm (approximately 7-8 inches or 18-20 cm).
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then prepare another thin thread and tie it to the end of the first one if you wish.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	Then position the patient's head so that it rests on your shoulder and is facing towards the sun, as this procedure requires good lighting and precision.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	Next, insert the needle into the root of the eyelash with precision and care, then quickly push it through the eyelid until you pull the offending hair out from below the surface.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	Then gently pull out the ingrown hair(s) and insert the needle back into the same hole in the eyelid, repeating this process one or two or three times, but no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then gently pull the thread through the eyelid until the ingrown hair is outside, attached to the needle by a small amount of wax (alixolati) so that it remains in place on the eyelid surface.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the wax (alixalati) is attached to the eyelid rather than the ingrown hair, gently pull the thread and wax downwards until it comes free from the upper hole, allowing the ingrown hair to be released from below.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	Examine the eyelid with your vision to ensure that you have removed the wax and ingrown hair, and then close the eyelids gently, leaving the stitches in place for two or three days until the eyelash adheres to its proper position and new skin grows over it.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	If the eyelash is very short, then attach a longer false hair to the natural lashes and use it to lift the ingrown hair or wait until it grows long enough to be easily lifted.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13: [Treatment for] Swollen Eyelids and Eyebrows
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Chapter 14: Treatment for Ectropion (Outward Turning of the Eyelid)
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the eyelid turns inward due to contracture of the eyelid, this is called entropion and can occur naturally or as a result of injury, surgery, or infection. The following procedures should be used to treat this condition: [
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The method of operation in this case is to cut the scar tissue and separate the layers of skin, placing a small piece of cloth between them, then stitching the layers together until they heal. This can help release contracture and allow the eyelid to return to its normal position over the eyeball.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	It is not advisable to use dry or constricting treatments for this condition, as they may worsen the symptoms and lead to more severe contracture or other complications. Instead, focus on gentle massage, manipulation, and moisturizing treatments to promote healing and reduce contracture.[
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in the case of causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and steep it with water in which there are chopped althea root and fennel seeds, or dyaquilon (a type of clay), mixed with a liquid oil, and soak a piece of cloth in this mixture and apply it to the affected area. This will help to reduce swelling and promote healing.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	The key to your treatment is to carefully make incisions with precision, avoiding any scarring or contracture that may have occurred at the beginning of the condition. This will allow for proper healing and reduce the risk of recurrence.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	The procedure that we have discussed is not a complete cure for ectropion or entropion, but rather a way to correct the abnormal position of the eyelid and restore it to its normal shape and function. Further treatment may be necessary to ensure long-term healing and prevent recurrence.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14: [Treatment for] Eyelash Disorders
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure for entropion which is done on the lower eyelid.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This entropion, which is done on the lower eyelid and is properly called by that name, can be congenital or acquired.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	However, acquired entropion is caused by injury, laceration, cautery, or similar factors.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the method of this operation is to take a needle with double thread and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left nasal corner to the right nasal corner so that the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then pull the skin apart with the needle at the upper part and draw it together with the needle, and use a wide spatula to incise.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And if the shape of the eyelid returns to its proper position, it is good; otherwise, take a thread and place it in the slit opening, using that to twist the eyelid into the correct shape, and then make two incisions on the lower side of the lower eyelid.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And let the ends of both incisions be at two corners of the slit opening, which should converge so that when they come together, a figure is formed in their junction.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is the Greek letter lambda (Λ).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then remove the skin by the amount corresponding to the slit opening below it, so that it cuts the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Then adjust the separated parts and stitch them together using wool thread, and treat those areas with what has been mentioned regarding softening medications and blisters until it heals.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if entropion is caused by a fissure, laceration, or cauterization, it is necessary to make an incision with a flat scalpel along the hairs of the eyelid as described earlier.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	Then separate with blisters between two lips as we mentioned earlier.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In summary of the discourse on the cure for entropion, whether it is upper or lower eyelid, the operation should proceed according to the form of entropion, which has several shapes.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And wise craftsmen always prepare devices in every possible way so that they can restore the shape to its natural form or close to it, and provide the patient with the best operation and instruments according to their needs.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Chapter 15: On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When this adhesion occurs in many men, such that the eyelid is solidified above with the white of the eye and is impeded in its natural movement and functions, it is necessary to insert a thread below the eyelid, raise it upwards, or extend it using a hook.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then you incise the adhesion with a fine scalpel that does not have sharp edges, making sure to use a blunt tip so as not to disturb the patient during the operation, and keep the scalpel in place without damaging the eye with its sharpness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adhesion, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural shape and for the entire adhesion to heal.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then you place saltwater in the eye, which you use to rinse it out, or distill juniper dissolved in water on it.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	Then you separate the eyelid from the eye with blisters and place wool soaked in egg white on the eye, and for three days use consolidating causes until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Chapter 16: On incision of a nail and eminence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is of two types: it can be nervous or non-nervous. A nervous nail is similar to a hard, thin bone, while a non-nervous nail resembles congealed white moisture, which when touched with a hook, can easily be grasped and removed without the hook being inserted into it.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both types of nails do not begin until they reach the lacrimal (tear duct) and gradually cover it, protecting the eye from light and preventing its moisture from evaporating.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	However, the method of working in the incision is that the patient places their head on your shoulder, and you open their eyes, raise the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail with a hook with minimal doubling, extending it upwards to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	Then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox or cow hair, or similar material, or strong bile, and gradually sharpen the tip of the needle, then place it in the middle of the nail, penetrating with the needle, tying the nail with bile; extend it upwards to the upper parts and excise with the horsehair the slit of the nail that cuts through the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And in this way, you follow it with the hair to the back of it (the nail).
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then you incise the remaining tissue at the root of the tear duct with a fine scalpel or small forceps, leaving the natural flesh of the tear duct so that through the incision there does not occur a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And sometimes the nail with only one hook or bile, as we mentioned earlier, and in this case, it should be excised with a scalpel of the following shape:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And make sure with the scalpel not to touch the corneal membrane and that it causes a rupture there, and that the pupil be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then place in the eye a little bit of ground salt or juniper powder, and leave that inside for another day; and take care of it with what is necessary until it heals.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle or the hook into it, nor can it be extracted with the hook, then in many cases this type of nail is cured with medications, and heals as is customary for ulcers and recommended in the division (of the medical text).
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise that (non-nervous nail), then you open the patient's eye and take a fine, sharp scalpel of the following shape:
am subtilitat.	I apologize for the error in my previous response. Here is the corrected translation:
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if sometimes that part is dislocated and hidden and stuck in that socket, then distill your oil on the patient's temple, made of juniper or aloe or wormwood, and fill the cavity within two days.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat the operation until everything that is out of place in it (the joint) has been restored, but if instead an abscess forms on the head, then leave it alone and first treat the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation on that part until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The swelling of the lacrimal gland, if noticed on the head due to great harm, should be suspended with a leech; and incise that part slightly, and do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill juniper oil on the lacrimal head and make an incision with cautery until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	On incising an abscess and what is born from skin that has adhered to the head.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes on the eyelids of people, red flesh is born that covers the pupil or approaches and presses on the eyelashes, causing them to curl outwards, and appears like a swollen lip.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation for this is that the patient places their head over a basin; and then you open the eyelids of the affected area and collect all the red flesh using suitable leeches, and hold it with forceps or a net. Then make an incision in the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the cautery, and be careful not to cut too deeply into the eye during your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And make the incision with the instrument that we have recommended in the treatment of nail conditions, or with small forceps with which you can collect pus according to the shape of the growth, following the description given in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And once your incision is complete and all of the flesh has been removed, fill the wound with wormwood powder or distill on it red-colored dust similar to that used in corrosive medicines, and place a piece of egg white over the outside of the wound until it is certain that the abscess will not return.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if some cause of the abscess remains and it is bleeding, and you fear that it may become infected, then leave the wound open and treat the infection with appropriate remedies until it has healed. Repeat the operation on the affected area until it is fully healed, and similarly, treat any skin adhesions that occur in this type of wound.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	However, it is important to avoid any treatment that may cause further harm to the affected area, either through natural or accidental means. This includes avoiding the use of tools and not placing your hand on the affected area until you are certain that the member can tolerate the procedure.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter eighteen.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On collecting pus from the eye.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus is red veins that are hardened on the eye and prevent the eyelid from functioning properly, causing it to swell for several days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary to first consider whether the eye in which pus has formed is otherwise healthy and free from other conditions. If this is the case, then you may proceed with collecting the pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And you should instruct the patient to place their head over a basin and apply leeches to the affected veins, using one or two depending on your judgement. The leech used in this treatment should be of a fine texture, as follows:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	Or you may use two leeches, one larger than the other, as follows:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And the affected veins should be gently bound with fine bandages, and the blood should be wiped away as needed until you see that the veins have receded from the eye and are no longer inflamed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful not to damage the eye with the tip of your instrument; and if you are performing this procedure during the day, do so in the afternoon when the sun is high, and take care to incise only the affected veins and not any other part of the eye.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have completed the procedure, you should then distill on the eye juniper or aloe to dissolve any remaining pus with its corrosive properties.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if you are unable to collect all of the pus in that moment, then you should apply a dressing to the area using a substance that alleviates pain and allows it to heal over several days until the pain subsides and there is no risk of infection.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then you should repeat the procedure as needed until the eye has fully healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And here is the shape of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter nineteen.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	On reducing a broken nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When treating a broken nose with cautery or with corrosive medicine, as described in the previous chapter, if the injury has not healed properly, then you should not apply heat to it. Instead, make an incision over the abscess and drain any pus or fluid that has accumulated inside, allowing the bone to be exposed so that it can heal properly.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And once the bone is exposed and you see signs of decay or discoloration, then you should use an instrument with this shape:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And this instrument is called a sharp-pointed probe, and it should be made of iron with a rounded tip, as shown in the following illustration:
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And place the sharp-pointed probe over the site of decay on the bone, and then gently rotate it between the teeth while applying gentle pressure until you feel the decayed tissue being scraped away.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And repeat this process several times, and then apply drying and styptic remedies to the affected area.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the wound has healed and healthy flesh has grown over it, and the body's natural healing processes have been completed within 40 days without any signs of infection or other complications, then you can be confident that the nose has healed properly.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	But if the wound has not healed properly or there are signs of infection or other complications, then you should not attempt to reset the broken bone. Instead, you should follow these steps: first, expose the bone using forceps or corrosive medicine, and once it is exposed, apply traction as follows:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The exterior part of the iron should be made triangular, and the tip of it should be first narrowed at the end as is often done.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then place that (the triangular-shaped iron) on the bone, and it should be near the lacrimal; and move your hand a little toward the eye, and then rotate your hand along with the trepan until it penetrates the whole bone, and the patient will feel it as soon as air escapes when you reach the sinus.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, now restore the area with styptic and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	And once the flesh has been cut and the area has hardened, now return the matter that had flowed out to the parts outside back into the nose, which is easier for the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Chapter 20: On the reduction of a prominent eye.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the eye protrudes with its entirety and does not cause any significant harm or reduction in vision, then it is necessary to relax the patient, make them lie down, and place blistering agents on the neck without scarification and allow them to draw well; also place a liniment on the eye made of acacia and aloe and wax and sarcocolla, and strengthen the application over the eye with powdered motes.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the way to make the powder is to take locks of lion's mane, and each lock should be folded in four layers; and make powder from those locks.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And place those (the powders) one on top of the other according to the quantity required by the eye.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And strengthen the application with a hard cloth with strong pressure, and repeat the blistering agents with suction without scarification; and after removing the blistering agents, leave the eye straight for one day and night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if during this time the ligament becomes softened, it is necessary to keep it very tight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And release the ligament during the day and night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if sometimes the eye is already reduced, that's good; otherwise, continue to apply the liniment with powders and pressure and blistering agents until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Chapter 21: On incising the prominence of the choroid (uveal tunica).
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a disruption in the uveal tunica and it protrudes outside the eyelids like a grape, and its appearance is monstrous to behold, and you wish to incise it, then the operation for this is as follows: insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from the lower part to the upper part, and insert another needle on the side near the lacrimal with double thread; make that one penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the piece of the uvea along the circumference of the needle, and strengthen that spot.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then remove the needle and place wool soaked in egg white albumen over the eye, and leave it until the thread with the grape falls out.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the eye with what comforts it while the wound heals.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes gather all the parts of the prominent swelling with a ring of cloth around the eye so that it fits properly, and then make a small hole with a fine spatula to reach the cavity of the eye, allow the humors to flow out through the albuginea, and when the pressure decreases, the eye will soon enter (return to its normal position).
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22.
De curacio de alconati.	Chapter 22: On the cure for an albucasis (albugo).
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness that is called albucasis is not anything but pus that has accumulated in the eye, resembling descending water but it is not (water).
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the method for working on it is to make the patient sit on a prepared and upright chair, and then take their head in your two hands and turn it so that you can see the pus flowing downwards; prevent it from descending further by blocking the lower part, allowing the patient to see as they normally would.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water (not pus).
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if the flow of pus has not been prepared with what we have mentioned, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and place it over the glandular tissue, just above the conjunctiva next to the corneal tissue in the corner (away from the iris), until the pus is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Once it has been expelled, now you should distill water with added tail fat in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey into the eye.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 23.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Chapter 23: On the cure for water flowing from the eye (tear duct blockage).
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already discussed the types of water (flowing from the eye) and which one is appropriate to treat with incisions as I have described; now do so according to the health status (of the patient).
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now you should make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and place their head so that their affected eye is facing upwards towards you, with astringent remedies applied to it.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And place your left hand near the patient's eyelid of their affected eye (if it is the left eye); or with your right hand if their affected eye is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And with your right hand take an almond (if the affected eye is the left one); or with your left hand if the affected eye is the right one.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And place the tip of the almond near the corner of the eye, close to the iris, and press it gently into the albumen of the eye with your thumb. Then rotate the almond with your hand.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then feel as the almond has penetrated through the albumen and reached its intended destination (the tear duct).
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the path of the almond to the cavity be the same length as the space between the pupil and the edge of the darkness (the iris), which is the corner of the eye; for you can see with the pupil through the vision of the eye due to the transparency of the corneal tissue.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond in the location of the water (blocked tear duct), and then gently press down on it several times; and if the water begins to flow immediately, then instruct the patient to open their eye and look at the object they had been focusing on before, while keeping the almond in their eye.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a moment; if the water has begun to flow again, then continue holding the almond in place with your other hand for a short time before removing it.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when the water no longer flows, then remove the almond gently and slowly from the eye, while rotating your hand around it; and then dissolve a small amount of clear rock salt in the water and wash the eye with this solution; finally, place a piece of clean cotton or wool soaked in rose oil, egg white albumen, and ligature over the patient's eyelid to keep their eye closed.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But in our time, we place a mixture of three hundred with egg white albumen over this (the affected eye).
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the almond does not penetrate the eye due to its hardness (because some people have very hard eyes), then it is necessary to take a tool called an alberite, which has this shape:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And then pierce with this (tool) the conjunctiva and do not deepen your hand into the incision, but only create a path for the almond to enter gently.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And introduce a poultice as we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you should complete your treatment by preparing a suitable bed for the patient to sleep on, where they can lie on their back in a dark room, and all movements should be forbidden.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And allow nature to take its course so that it can heal itself, and do not let it incline to the right or left side at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And apply a ligament according to their disposition within the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And on that third day, unbind them in that dark room and expose the wound to the air, have them look at some causes (remedies), and then reapply the ligament within seven days.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And it's not necessary to do that during the hours of treatment or immediately before an infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	It is advisable that you avoid doing that because water can easily penetrate through a large and intense opening (or wound).
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if a boil appears, then it is advisable to unbind the wound before the seventh day and treat the boil with a remedy that draws out boils (or pus).[`json
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you cover their eyes and place a feeding cup on their mouth, allowing them to eat for several days through this cup while they remain in that dark room.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually move them out of that dark room and engage them in conversation, remedies (or treatments).
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy, the student is not excused from observing certain procedures, and therefore you should be bold in carrying out the operation (or treatment).
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And now some of those who are skilled in the art have arrived, and some say that a fire should be made in the Ayrac magic lamp, through which water is drawn (or evaporated).[`json
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But I have not seen or heard of such a thing in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients. And it is possible that this is something new.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	These are the forms of the species of magic, which are above those who are ignorant of them. (Note: I am not sure about this translation as "magdaan" is an unrecognizable term to me)
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	They are made of copper or iron specifically, and their edges are sharpened to a triangular subtlety, with a pointed end that is shaped like this.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter 24.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	On the treatment of fleshy growths in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When fleshy growths appear in the nose that are caused by some factor resembling the sting of a heavy-set scorpion or a polyp-shaped foot, this condition is called "polypus" because it resembles the represented foot. [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/polypus](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/polypus)
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And it is cancerous flesh that is scaly, eroded, and of a dark color, or it is fleshy tissue like that of a lion, but not dark in color. (Note: "cancerous" here means the medical condition of cancer, not necessarily malignant.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cancer#Etymology\_1](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cancer#Etymology_1)
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in the case of these non-fraudulent and non-cancerous lion-colored flesh, it is advisable to have the patient sit between your hands in the sun, expose their nose, and then prick them with a lancet on those fleshy areas. (Note: "onci" means a small unit of weight, but here it probably refers to a surgical instrument like a lancet.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oncia#Etymology\_3](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/oncia#Etymology_3)
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then carefully extract the growth from the outside, and skillfully cut away what you have captured of those with a sharp spatula on one side so that you know all the flesh has been removed. If there is any remaining cause that makes separation possible, then use one of the fine instruments to gently remove it without leaving any remaining cause. (Note: "spatum" means "spoon", and "estrumentz subtils" probably refers to surgical instruments.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spatula#Latin](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spatula#Latin)[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/instrumentum#Latin](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/instrumentum#Latin)
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if it is controlled by pus or a boil develops, then you should do what is necessary: in the case of malignant boils, you should cauterize them until the pus and all the abscesses are removed. (Note: "cauterize" means to burn or sear with a hot iron.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cauterize#English](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cauterize#English)
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then place it (the growth) in the nose and irrigate the incision with vinegar or water.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nostrils are open and there is moisture flowing into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh attached to the upper bones of the nose, which have not been reached by the incision.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, you should take some bile from the patient or another person with a lump in their throat (or perhaps "swallowing difficulty"), then place small pieces of it in the nose using a rod or other suitable means. Place one piece at a time, leaving space between each piece equal to the width of a finger or less, and encourage the patient to swallow. Then insert one end of the bile into the nostrils using a rod or other suitable means that is available. (Note: "fiel" means "bile" in Old French.) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/foie#French](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/foie#French)
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And once that is done, it will draw out its odor into the nasal passages and be expelled through the nose onto the throat, for many people find this action to be similar to what children do at school, and it is an easy remedy for those who wish to try it. (Note: "golayro" may refer to the back of the throat or the area around the tonsils.)
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place both ends of the bile in the nostrils, with one end protruding and the other remaining inside, and administer small pieces of flesh from the bile using the pieces that are inside it, until you know that the flesh is attached to the pieces of bile. (Note: "serratura de carn" may refer to small pieces or shavings of meat.)
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then remove the bile and place it in the nose, leaving a small piece of it there for three days or more until it has eaten away at any remaining flesh. (Note: "enguent" may refer to an ointment or salve.)[`json
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the treatment, place a leaden cannula in the nose for several days until it has healed. (Note: "canula" is a small tube or pipe, and "plom" is lead.)[`json
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if the treatment ends in dryness, use this one. (Note: It is not clear what "this one" refers to, as it is not specified in the given text.)[`json
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument called "capipurge fazedor" with which oils and medicines are distilled in the nose. (Note: "capipurge fazedor" may refer to a still or distillation apparatus used for making nasal drops or snuffs.)[`json
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or copper, resembling a small open lamp, similar to a small basin with its mouth. (Note: "meat" may be a typo and should be "metal".)
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the nozzle of the capipurge fazedor instrument should be flat, open; to which should be attached a handle at the back, with which you can hold it when heating in it oil or any juice or extract that you want. (Note: "cannula" means a small tube or pipe, and "nozzle" is the part of an apparatus through which a fluid, gas, or powder is discharged.)[`json
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And these capipurges are valuable: recipe for the following - beaver castoreum, white balm, ginger, saffron pilule, long pepper, asafetida, and euphorbium with one spoonful of each. (Note: "recipe" means a prescription or list of ingredients.) [`json And you will mix it with juice of beet and cabbage, and make pills, and soak one pill in warm water, and insert it into the patient's nose while they lie on their back. (Note: "tebeza" means warm or tepid.)[`json
Capitol .xxv.	Capital twenty-five. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise)
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of pus in the nostrils.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	It is often seen that pus forms in the nostrils and increases and becomes noticeable in certain days, until it is necessary to pay attention to it.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And so it is appropriate to lance that (the pus) at the beginning of its appearance and drain all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	Then place a poultice or a burning medicine on the location where it was, in its place.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if the lancing is delayed until it has increased, then consider whether it is hardened, of dark color and with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron because it is a malignant abscess; for often those who lance this type of abscess cause great harm to the person.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of soft touch and not of dark color, and sometimes lancing it is possible, then make the patient comfortable and lance it without fear, and cure the location with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Capital twenty-six. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise)
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	On the suturing of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by wound or similar (meaning injury).
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when there is a separation of continuity in one of these cartilaginous parts (nose, lips, ear), little effort should be made in the operation except in certain people.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore it is necessary, when dealing with any of these causes (injury), to consider whether it is a fresh wound with its blood; and then you should bring the two lips of the wound together with sutures, and take care of it until it is healed.[(\*\*Note\*\*: Sutura refers to stitches or suturing, the act of sewing together the edges of a wound)
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of separation of continuity are already separated and each is made whole, then it is necessary to cut into each side of its raw edge until blood comes out. (Note: excorjes means to scrape or shave off the skin)
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then bring the two lips together with sutures and bind those tightly, and on top of that sprinkle dragon's blood powder and let it sit for three days, and place a plaster of diascordium (a type of medical plaster) or any other consolidating plaster over the powder, and leave it in place for two or three days. Then remove it and replace the plaster and leave it until the pus is cut off by itself, and then take care with ointment until it is healed. (Note: Dragon's blood is a red resin obtained from several species of trees that is used in traditional medicine as a surgical dressing, among other uses)
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the method of suturing is that you bring together the separation of continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the stomach, or bring together the separation of continuity with pus as I have shown you. (Note: it seems that there are different techniques for suturing depending on the location and type of wound)
Capitol .xxvii.	Capital twenty-seven. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise)
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	On the removal of those causes that occur in the two lips within the edges. (Note: It seems to be referring to foreign bodies or other obstructions that may be present in a wound)
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	It is often seen that many people have in the edges of their lips certain hard abscesses similar to lumps of fat, some are smaller and some are larger. (Note: This could be referring to sebaceous cysts or other types of growths)
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore it is necessary to separate the lips and open each of those hardenings completely, and then lance them and fill the location with three times the amount of turpentine until the blood coagulates, and then wash it with vinegar and take care of the location with something astringent until it is healed. (Note: Turpentine is a volatile oil obtained from pine trees that has been used in traditional medicine as an antiseptic and for other purposes)
Capitol .xxviii.	Capital twenty-eight. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise) [**Note**: I am assuming this is a medieval medical text, given the language and terminology used. However, I am not an expert in medieval medicine and my translations are based on my knowledge of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The translations may not be 100% accurate but I have tried to convey the intended meaning as closely as possible.)
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	On lancing the flesh attached to the gums. (Note: This could refer to an abscess or other infection of the gum tissue)
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Often there is a swelling on the gum line which ancient doctors called "albulus", therefore it is necessary to suspend that with a lancet or hold it with forceps and lance it at its base, and let the pus run out or the blood. (Note: Albulus may refer to an abscess or other type of swelling on the gum tissue)
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then place over the location turpentine or another astringent or stimulating powder. (Note: Turpentine and other powders are used to promote healing and prevent further infection)
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if the flesh returns, then lance it again and cauterize it, for the cautery will prevent its return. (Note: Cauterization is the act of burning or searing tissue to destroy it and prevent further infection)
Capitol .xxix.	Capital twenty-nine. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise) [**Note**: I am assuming this is a medieval medical text, given the language and terminology used. However, I am not an expert in medieval medicine and my translations are based on my knowledge of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The translations may not be 100% accurate but I have tried to convey the intended meaning as closely as possible.)
De razo de dentz am ferr.	On extracting teeth with iron. (Note: This could refer to any type of dental extraction or surgery) [**Translation**: *On Extracting Teeth with Iron*
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When there are rough, jagged edges on the surfaces of both inner and outer teeth where they meet the gums, and some are darkened or made greenish-blue, it is a sign that corruption has reached the gums, and this makes the teeth loose. (Note: This could be referring to any type of dental infection or decay)
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	Therefore it is necessary to have the patient seated between your legs and to hold their head in your lap, then file down the teeth where those rough edges appear until no trace of them remains, and deal with the blackness and greenish color and any other problems until they are corrected. (Note: This could refer to using a dental file or similar instrument to smooth out rough edges on the teeth)
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If that is sufficient for the beginning of the treatment, then it is good; but if not, then you should repeat the treatment on the following days until you reach the desired outcome. (Note: This could refer to repeating the dental filing or other treatment as necessary until the problem is resolved)
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that teeth require many types of rasps with various shapes and forms depending on what is required for the operation. (Note: This could refer to using different types of dental files or other instruments to shape and smooth the teeth as needed)
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And so because the rasp used for shaping the tooth from the inner side is different from the one used for shaping between teeth, and these shapes of rasps must be prepared by you as follows: (Note: This could refer to using different types of dental instruments for different purposes)
Capitol .xxx.	Capital thirty. (this refers to a chapter or section number in the treatise)
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On extraction of teeth. (Note: This could refer to any type of dental extraction or surgery)
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	It is necessary to cure the tooth of its pain with every care and delay in any extraction of it, for there is no cause that can replace it when it is extracted, because it is a substance that sublimes (evaporates) during the extraction process. (Note: This could be referring to the release of gases or fluids from the tooth during extraction, causing pain or discomfort)
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But when the patient is forced to have the tooth extracted, it is absolutely necessary that you are certain which tooth is causing pain, because many times the pain deceives the patient and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and so you extract the wrong tooth and the pain does not cease until the truly painful and diseased tooth is extracted. This we have seen through the work of barbers. (Note: Barbers often performed dental extractions and other medical procedures during medieval times)
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore how do you ensure which tooth is causing pain? You should scarify the gum around the tooth with a spatula that has some virtue (medicinal power) until it is separated from the gum all around, and then use your fingers or delicate forceps to gently probe the area, gradually increasing pressure until you locate the affected tooth. (Note: This could refer to using a topical anesthetic or other medication on the gum tissue surrounding the suspected tooth, followed by careful probing to identify the source of pain)
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then apply large forceps with strong tenacity for good leverage or strong extraction, and place the patient's head between your thighs so that they are securely held in place and do not move, and then pull the tooth straight along its axis so as not to break it or cause further pain to the patient. (Note: This could refer to using forceps to grasp the tooth firmly and extract it from its socket with minimal damage to surrounding tissue)
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if it is not loose, then take one of those instruments and insert it beneath the tooth with ease and gentle force, so as to begin its removal. (Note: This could refer to using a dental elevator or other instrument to loosen the tooth from its socket before extracting it)
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is fractured or decayed, it is necessary to pack it with a cloth and tighten it with a thin wire at its end so that it does not break during extraction with forceps. (Note: This could refer to using a cloth or gauze to stabilize a fractured or severely decayed tooth before extracting it)
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	It is necessary to operate carefully with scarification around the entire gum line and pay close attention to your strength so as not to break the tooth and leave a fragment behind, which could cause greater harm than the initial pain. (Note: This could refer to using a sharp instrument to cut away gum tissue and expose the root of the tooth before extracting it) [**Note**: I am assuming this is a medieval medical text, given the language and terminology used. However, I am not an expert in medieval medicine and my translations are based on my knowledge of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The translations may not be 100% accurate but I have tried to convey the intended meaning as closely as possible.)
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And be careful not to do as some ignorant barbers do in their haste and recklessness during tooth extraction, without administering what we have recommended; for many times they cause great harm to the patient, making the illness worse and more difficult to cure, and causing damage to the gums or even extracting part of the jawbone along with the tooth. (Note: This could be a warning against unskilled or careless dental practitioners who may cause unnecessary harm during extractions)
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then rinse the mouth with vinegar and salt water after extraction. (Note: This could help to clean the wound and prevent infection)
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if there is persistent bleeding after extraction, as sometimes occurs, then apply a small amount of crushed egg and sprinkle it on the wound; but if this does not help, use cautery. (Note: This could refer to using a hot iron or other heated instrument to stop bleeding by searing the tissue)
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the forceps and delicate tenaculum with which you extract the tooth at the beginning should have a long handle, a short shank, and a thick end, so that they do not bend when using them. (Note: This could refer to using specialized dental instruments for extraction) [**Translation**: *On Dental Extraction*
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And they should also have a thick handle so that when you use them with force, they do not bend; the handles should be short. (Note: This could refer to using sturdy dental instruments designed for strong extraction)
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	They should be made of Indian iron, with straight handles, and on the ends of these handles there should be teeth that interlock with each other and tighten by means of strong constriction. And sometimes the ends of these handles have the shape of a stork's beak, which is called "guanta", and they have strong gripping power. (Note: This could refer to using specialized dental forceps for extraction with interlocking teeth or a curved beak-shaped end) [**Translation**: *On Dental Extraction*
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	On the extraction of teeth and dislocation of bones in the jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must extract a tooth that is stuck for any reason, it is appropriate to place a piece of linen or wool on the spot and leave it there for a day or two until the area softens; then use a tool such as algesti or tenalhas with the ends resembling the beak of a bird called the stork or crane.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The ends (of the tool) are made to enter just like a file or rasping tool.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if the tooth does not yield to extraction with these forceps or tenalhas, then it is necessary to cut into the gum and remove all the flesh around it, and introduce the instrument called an atali, which is a small lever of this shape: (image)
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And the short end should be thick and not curved so that it is not stuck (gets jammed).
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	So if the gum is separated in this way, that's good; and if not, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument should have a triangular end with some thickness to it.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer end.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And now you can assist with this instrument, which has two prongs of the following shape: (image)
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	and with other instruments used in tooth filing, for assistance is provided with this instrument which resembles a large onion, and its shape is as follows: (image)
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	with a twisted or short triangular end, which should be somewhat thick and not curved so that it does not get jammed.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And you should know that the instruments for many teeth are similar to other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But skilled and clever artisans in the craft will find for themselves according to what the operation and various ailments require; for there are diseases that the ancients did not mention nor create specific instruments for, because of the diverse forms of different species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are dislocated or broken, then the injury should be treated in its place with the appropriate instruments and forceps that we mentioned during tooth extraction, and assist with a tool of this shape: (image)
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And it should have some thickness, gradually decreasing in size, and be held in the mouth to prevent any escape or leakage until the bone is fully extracted; then fill the gap with appropriate medicines.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that part of the breakage and its darkness (pus or infection), and treat it until it heals.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter 32
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	On the care of teeth that protrude more than others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When teeth protrude unnaturally, and their shape is damaged, especially when it happens to women and particularly to young girls, then it is necessary to consider: if the tooth does not touch another tooth and there is no possibility of adjustment or alignment, then extract that tooth; but make sure it is not connected to another tooth. If it is, then cut it with this instrument, which has the following shape: (image) It resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian steel with a very sharp end.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And make your incision so that you can cut the tooth within a few days due to its hardness, and ensure that it does not damage any other teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the tooth is prominent and exposed to filing, then file it with a file made of Indian steel that has this shape: (image)
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it be entirely made of Indian steel, including the file and sharpening tool; and have many sharp points like those on a needle-making awl, with which you can gradually file the tooth over several days with ease, so that no other teeth are damaged or become loose.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And at the end, smooth it out and remove any remaining rough edges with these razors.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	If a part of a tooth is broken and it cuts the tongue, then you must file it down until the roughness of that fragment is removed and hidden, and fill it in so that the tongue does not become injured or the speech impaired.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter 33
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver alloy.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When the front teeth are damaged due to injury or loss due to blows or accidents, and the patient is unable to chew properly, and you have treated it with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not been successful, then for the sake of strength and longevity, use gold alloy rather than silver alloy, as silver can tarnish and corrode over time, whereas gold never changes.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the alloy be of such fineness and thickness as can fit between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the alloy and place twice its volume between two healthy teeth, and gradually increase it with twists of the alloy between two damaged teeth, until the cloth reaches the healthy tooth on the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then gradually increase the filling in the direction of the starting point, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill so that it does not damage the surrounding teeth.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your twisting tool, which you use to strengthen the alloy between the teeth, be used with care so that it does not leak out of the gaps.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then cut off any excess alloy with forceps or tweezers and place those pieces in the gaps with a tool, and curve them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so as not to cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then leave it as tight as a Roman (coin).
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it becomes loose or broken, strengthen it with more alloy in the same way as needed over time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of the teeth and the form of straightening two healthy teeth and two damaged teeth, as shown in these illustrations.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is necessary to return one or two teeth to their proper positions in their respective sockets, and they have grown back as we recommended, and are healthy again.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And only a good and skilled craftsperson can do that.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes for certain reasons, a piece of cow bone is suitable, and it is made in the shape of a tooth and placed in the place where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we mentioned, and remains in place for a long time, serving its purpose well.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter 34
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	On the incision of a ligament that forms in the tongue and prevents speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which appears below the tongue in some cases or is naturally present at birth, or occurs accidentally due to an injury that has already healed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation consists of opening the patient's mouth while holding their head steady; then lifting their tongue and making an incision in that ligament nerve according to its width, so as to release the tongue from its attachment.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if there is any hardness or thickening due to the consolidation of an injury, then pour some liquid (such as a medicinal solution) and cut through it along its width until you have released the ligament and eliminated the thickening.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And be careful that no rupture is made in the peritoneum of the flesh and that you do not cut here an artery and cause a flow of blood.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the wounds of the incision with water or with wine vinegar or with cold water; and then place a ligature under the tongue, that is to say, a bandage that keeps the patient's tongue down in each movement so that it does not become infected again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if there is a flow of blood, place vitriol trixat over the area; but if the blood gushes out, then cauterize the area with a lancinating cautery which is suitable for this.[**Note**: Vitriol trixat was a medical powder made from potassium nitrate, also known as saltpeter. It was used to stop bleeding and heal wounds in medieval medicine.]
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then carry out that treatment with the other causes until there is a cure.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter 35.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the removal of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes, cysts occur under the tongue that resemble a small nodule and prevent it from performing its natural function, and these can quickly grow to fill the entire mouth.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the procedure for this is to open the patient's mouth wide in front of the sun and examine the cyst.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it as dark or black in color and hard, and the patient cannot feel it, then do not touch what is rigid.[**Note**: The text suggests that if the cyst appears dark or black, and feels hard and insensitive to touch, it should be left alone.]
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	But if it tends to be whitish and moist, then insert a silver probe into it with a thin spatula, cutting all around it; and if blood comes out during the procedure, place vitriol trixat on top of it until the bleeding stops. [**Note**: The text recommends using a silver probe and a thin spatula to cut the cyst, and suggests that vitriol trixat be used to stop any bleeding.]
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then continue your work until you have completely removed it, washing the area with wine vinegar and salt; and treat the remaining wound with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter 36.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the removal of cysts in both ears and those located in the ear canal, as well as other types of cysts.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When cysts occur in the ear canal, they are often glands that have become swollen and resemble small lumps. These can sometimes protrude from the ears and are known as "two ears." If you treat these cysts with the methods previously described and they do not heal, then you should consider whether the cyst is hard, dark in color, and insensitive to touch. If so, then you should not use a knife or other metal instrument on it. [**Note**: The text recommends against using any metal instruments on a particularly hard and unresponsive cyst, likely due to the risk of causing further damage.]
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	But if it is red in color and the size of a bean, then do not touch it with metal tools because it may cause bleeding. Instead, wait for it to mature on its own, after which it can either be removed or will break open naturally.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	But if it is white in color, round, and the size of a bean, then it should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	The procedure for this is as follows: before beginning the operation, examine whether the cyst has healed on its own or if it has become smaller. Then have the patient sit in front of you with their head facing towards you and open their mouth wide. A servant should hold the patient's tongue down with a noble instrument that looks like this:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	It should be made of silver or iron and be as thin as a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	When you press the instrument against the tongue and see the cyst, then take the probe and insert it into the opening of the cyst. Then pull the probe outwards as much as possible.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Or if you are unable to do this and instead cause damage to one of the membranes, then take a scalpel and make an incision using this instrument:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	It is similar in shape to forceps, but its tips are curved so that the openings face each other and are very sharp, made of iron and well-polished.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not available, then use a scalpel of the following shape instead: one end should be sharp and the other blunt.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And after you have made an incision on one side, make another incision on the other side using this same method. Then clean the wound with cold water.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is bleeding after the incision, clean the wound with an infusion made from elderberry flowers or myrtle leaves and other similar styptic substances until the bleeding stops. Then treat the wound until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes other cysts occur in the ear canal in addition to those behind the ears, and these should be incised in the same way as described above for two cysts.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	I once treated a woman who had a cyst in her ear canal that was dark in color and insensitive to touch. The cyst had closed off her ear canal and she could barely breathe, and she had stopped eating and drinking water. She was on the verge of death if not for my intervention within one or two days.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the cyst had grown so large that it had taken two months for it to burst through two holes in the skin.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And so I carefully inserted one of their probes and pulled it out, extracting a large portion of the cyst. Then I made an incision in the other cyst that had formed near the first hole, opened the patient's mouth, held down her tongue, and inserted the probe into this second cyst.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	Then I removed a large portion of it, and only a small amount of blood came out.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	And so the woman's ear canal was healed, and she began to drink water and eat food immediately. Then I continued to incise the cyst several times over a long period of time, and another cyst formed in its place that I also had to remove. This process continued until the wound had completely healed.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And so I inserted some wool into her ear canal and cauterized it to prevent any further complications. Then I left the area, not knowing what fate God had in store for me regarding this matter.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter 37.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of incising a whitlow when it becomes cystic.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarrheal matter comes to the whitlow and it becomes cystic and elongated, then it is called "perpendicular." If it is large and round in the lower part, then it is called a "buba."
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it has healed with the method I previously described and you are not satisfied with your treatment, and you see that the cauterized cyst is still present and fine, then you should incise the one that has formed nearby and is round. If it is long and bloody, dark in color or black, and not sensitive to touch, then you must be careful when making an incision because there is a risk of harming the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see the cyst based on its whiteness and length as I previously described, then have the patient sit up straight and use an instrument to press down their tongue. Insert the probe into the new cyst and pull it downward, making an incision with one of the two instruments that I mentioned earlier in the section about two cysts.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And it is necessary that you do not make an incision beyond the natural boundary without adding anything, because if you cut into it further, you will damage their speech.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And during the incision, use what I recommended in the section on two cysts, and treat it until it heals.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient is afraid of the incision, then it is necessary to use caution during the cauterization without causing fear. The method of cauterization should be done with hot water, and the practitioner should hold the patient's head in their lap, press down their tongue using the instrument described earlier, and pour the hot water onto the affected area using a spoon or other similar tool. Then place the heated tip of the instrument onto the cyst, ensuring that it is not too thick or thin, and fully cover the concavity of the instrument's tip with the cyst.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the outer part of the instrument's concavity, where the medicine is placed, be shaped like a curved dish, and place the instrument with the medicine onto the whitlow. The patient should lean over the side of their bed so that saliva or mucus from their mouth does not touch the affected area, causing any additional damage to the ear canal.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand with the medicine over the whitlow, and press it onto the affected area for a quarter of an hour until you see that it has become darkened and numbed due to the biting effect of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	If you prefer, take some cotton and wrap it around the tip of the probe. Then submerge the cotton in the medicine and insert the probe into a medical cannula so that the cotton adheres to it. Repeat this process several times until you achieve the desired effect from the cauterization of the whitlow. Then leave it alone, allowing it to dry out and fall off after three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	If you find it necessary to repeat the medicine, do so. After cauterizing the whitlow, clean around it with a cotton swab dipped in boric acid powder, and wipe away any remaining medicine from around the affected area. Wash the area with cold water, and apply an ointment to the outside of the wound. Then, cover the wound with dressings until it has healed completely.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	This type of treatment is safer than incision and more cautious.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the whitlow can be healed with something more subtle than cauterization or incision, which is done through sublimation in this way: gather chamomile, hyssop, oregano, rue, Arabic gum, camomile, wormwood, and similar herbs. Grind all these ingredients together into a powder, then soak them in vinegar and boil the mixture. Strain the liquid through a fine cloth, and pour it into a bowl that is placed over a fire. Above the bowl, place an arched instrument made of iron or silver in such a way that its concavity faces downwards towards the bowl.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula above which it should cause noticeable swelling.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And apply pressure on those swollen veins until they dry up, but be careful not to perform this procedure at the onset of abscess formation, as it would be too harsh on the abscess. Instead, you should cauterize the area around the abscess to promote draining.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if you do not have that instrument with you, take a reed and make a plug out of egg white and insert it into the extremity to form a seal, so that the steam does not burn the patient's mouth, as the egg white prevents combustion.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this procedure is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter thirty-eight.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	On the extraction of splinters and foreign objects stuck in the throat, as well as other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Swollen veins or a fish bone, or any other cause may be stuck in the throat.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, you must extract what is visible and obvious on the surface, after looking carefully and pressing the tongue down with an appropriate instrument to reveal what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what is not visible and is hidden in the throat, you should make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, as this can easily dislodge the object stuck in the throat. Alternatively, you can have the patient swallow a piece of raw nap or lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge and soak it with vinegar, then have the patient swallow it. Once it reaches the location of the splinter, it will expel and remove the foreign object.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And you can also use an eel soaked in vinegar and inserted down the throat, or take a piece of garlic and insert it into the patient's throat while they are lying down.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if the object is not expelled by any of the above methods, then you must use an instrument made of lead in this way:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it should be slightly larger than a finger, with a concavity at the end that can easily be inserted into the patient's throat. [
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And keep the patient's head elevated, and make sure not to touch their throat bones, so that they do not become alarmed or cause further injury by touching the affected area with their hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But it would be better if the patient can insert the instrument themselves with their knowledge of the location of the object and gently push it downward, while you pull the wire attached to the instrument upward, all according to the depth prepared for removal of the object.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter thirty-nine.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	On the extraction of a bloodsucker attached to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating a bloodsucker attached to the throat with medication, as we have discussed in the section on treatment with medicines and not surgery, observe carefully the location of the bloodsucker by looking into the patient's mouth while holding down their tongue with an appropriate instrument.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	And if you see the bloodsucker, extract it gently and carefully with a pair of tweezers or some other appropriate tool.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	But if you cannot extract it with tweezers, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's throat, place a red-hot iron in the concavity of the cannula, do this repeatedly until the bloodsucker is dead and removed from the throat. Also, advise the patient to avoid drinking any liquids for the entire day.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And you can also use a horn filled with warm water and rinse the patient's mouth with it, then forbid them from swallowing anything for an hour or so, as the bloodsucker will be attracted to the water and come out on its own.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is still not removed using the previous methods, then fumigate the patient with cumin or asafoetida using the same instrument recommended for fumigating the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this four times.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	Here is another way to perform fumigation: take a pot with burning coals inside and cover it with a cloth that has a hole in the middle where you can insert the instrument. Place the extremity of the instrument through the hole and apply the fumigation. Have the patient place their mouth over the end of the cannula, closing their lips around it to ensure that the fumes reach the bloodsucker, which will soon fall out once it is affected by the smoke.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if the bloodsucker does not come out, continue with fumigation multiple times and advise the patient to avoid drinking liquids, eat salty foods and onions, but no water. This regimen is also necessary for removing the bloodsucker.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	Here is the shape of the instrument used to remove bloodsuckers from the throat when they are visible. It resembles forceps but has a slight curve in its design. [
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	And the end of this instrument should be curved like a stork's beak and have a rough surface, created by filing or sanding, to ensure that it holds onto the bloodsucker when it is extracted from the throat.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter forty.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In this chapter, I will provide an overview of abscesses and their treatment.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses come in many forms and varieties, each with its own unique characteristics, which I will discuss in detail in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	Abscesses can be classified into two main categories based on their formation and shape: the first type is determined by the specific type of abscess itself, while the second type is caused by the accumulation of excess fluid in the body.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	The second category of abscesses is based on the location in which they occur, as each location presents unique challenges and requires specific surgical techniques for proper treatment. For instance, an abscess located in the head will be treated differently than one found in the hip or any other part of the body.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And it is important to note that some abscesses should not be drained or punctured, but rather left to mature and heal on their own or allowed to reach full development before any surgical intervention is attempted.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	There are other types of abscesses that need to be drained or lanced when they are swollen and not yet mature according to their natural course. For example, abscesses located near joints may take a longer time to mature, and if left untreated for too long, can cause damage to the ligaments or nerves in the affected area, leading to contracture of that limb. Abscesses near major organs, such as those located near the groin or around the rectum, should also be drained promptly to prevent infection from spreading and causing further damage. However, it is important not to perform a crude incision on an immature abscess, but rather wait until it matures sufficiently before attempting any surgical intervention. This will help prevent the formation of fistulas or incomplete healing that can lead to other complications.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	It is crucial to know the right time for draining an abscess, and that is when it has matured.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you should know that an abscess is mature when there is a decrease in pain and fever, as well as reduced redness and swelling, decreased heart rate, and the softening of the lump or abscess. These are some of the signs that indicate maturation.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And it is essential to know that the incision should be made in a location lower than the abscess and directed towards the center of the swelling for proper drainage and healing.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the incision should always be made along the length of the skin or body, especially if the abscesses are located in areas such as the armpits, feet, legs, tendons, nerves, and arteries. In these cases, it is important to avoid making reflections or angles during the incision to prevent damage to nearby structures. Instead, make the incision along the length of the skin or body part, ensuring proper drainage and healing.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	However, when the abscess is located in a fleshy area, it would be better to wait until the digestion of the abscess has been confirmed before performing an incision, as described earlier. If you make an incision too soon, the pus and dead tissue will spread, leading to hardening of the wound edges and increased depth of the abscess.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses may need to be drained according to the width of the skin or body, depending on the necessity or based on the requirements of the member.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	It is important to make a small incision for small abscesses, while larger and more severe abscesses may require a larger or deeper incision, depending on the size of the abscess.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And there are some abscesses that require the skin to be turned back or folded over, creating a concave shape before it is incised and drained. This method is typically used for large abscesses such as those found in the groin or armpit, or for boils that have become severely infected.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And there are abscesses that require an incision with three angles, and those that are incised like the figure of a myrtle leaf, such as the abscesses found in the inguinal area or near the rectum.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And for those, a round incision or crescent-shaped incision may be administered, depending on the shape of the abscess and its location in the body.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But for those abscesses that are not as deep, such as shallow abscesses or "lion-like" abscesses, it is best to make a superficial incision or a simple one only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And when the abscess is large and has accumulated a significant amount of pus, it is important to incise it but not to extract all the pus at once. After removing some of the pus, pack the wound with dressing to be removed the next day. Then, remove more pus and repack the wound, repeating this process gradually until the abscess is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is a child, an elderly person in a weakened state, or a woman in menstruation, as the animal spirit can be significantly reduced with the expulsion of pus, leading to rapid death. Therefore, it is important to perform the procedure gradually and carefully to avoid any complications.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Therefore, it is important to be cautious when performing incisions on abscesses and to carefully assess the size of the wound before proceeding. For small or shallow wounds, use a simple dressing or bandage made from linen or cotton, while larger wounds may require a more complex dressing with multiple layers to prevent infection and promote healing. It is also important to ensure that all instruments used during the procedure are clean and sterilized, and to administer proper post-operative care to minimize the risk of complications.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If part of the skin has been cut away or turned back in the abscess, then it is important to close the wound with an old linen or wool dressing or thread made from cloth, as you would when suturing a wound or stitching up a cut, making sure it is dry. Strengthen this over the course of three days and proceed with treatment and care for the wound until it has healed completely.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if there is bleeding during the procedure, apply a cloth soaked in warm water and wine to the site of the bleeding multiple times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then it is important to administer appropriate treatment and medication, as recommended in various sections of this book. This may include using powders or other remedies that have been previously recommended for controlling bleeding.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is winter and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you should apply poultices made from wine and cautery oil to the area to prevent damage to the nerves.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer and the location of the abscess is fleshy, then you should apply poultices soaked in water, oil, or wine and oil to the area for three days, as we have said before. After that, you should open up the abscess, clean it, and administer appropriate treatment until it heals completely.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	This is what is necessary for the understanding of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already spoken of every kind of abscess regarding its treatment in separate chapters.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter 41.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	On the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck region of the head.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the neck region of the head, small abscesses, which are of the nature of swellings containing tunics of their own; and the types of these are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And their pus is thin, and some of them contain fluid similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And some of them contain fluid similar to powder, and similar in appearance; and there are those that are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the incision and removal of all of them, there is no fear, for the extension of these does not cause opposing tension.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in incising these is that you probe them with an instrument called a trocar, until you are sure of what they contain.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	If what it contains is fluid, then cut it with an incision along its length following the surface in this manner:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Begin the incision along line B and continue it to line G. Once the fluid has been evacuated, then excise that part which contained the fluid, leaving no cause of any kind behind, for too much will return if even a small amount is left behind.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then immerse a piece of cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is available; otherwise, in water and salt; and fill the wound with it, leaving it inside for another day, for this will corrode all that remains of the skin's outer layer.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the cotton with Egyptian ointment again, if necessary, until you are confident that there is no longer any remaining cause of damage to the skin; once this is the case, treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	If the abscess contains fatty nodes, then incise it in this manner:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with the incision taking a cross-shaped form and making an opening between two lips of the incision, and then cutting it entirely on all sides, and exerting your strength in extracting the tunic that contains it.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if this creates opposing tension, then do as I have already told you.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Similarly, proceed with the incision and treatment of a stony abscess following what I have told you; and the incision on a stony abscess is easier because it contains little blood and little fluid.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes the cause of these abscesses in the head in some men is not due to an excess of moisture; this occurs because it cannot be incised on an abscess in a woman's head, and instead, one finds that the abscess is as hard as a stone, rough, white, and difficult to cut through. And if someone were to strike such a person with force, they would cause harm.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in other abscesses that occur on the head, this is not the case; this does not apply to those such as the abscesses that appear on children's heads and near their ears, but the incision of these should be a surface one.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And leave the opening of these on their lower side to relieve the body of the discharge in the lower parts.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then treat them with what is appropriate for their healing.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter 42.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	On the incision of scrofula that occur in the neck region.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Often, these abscesses occur in the neck region, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body as well.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that occur in the neck are often generated between them, and all scrofula of this kind is within its own tunic; and as with nodes and abscesses on the head, this is similar to what has been described before.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	The types of these scrofula are many, as some of them are stony, and some contain fluid; and there are some that are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore, in the one that you see with good appearance upon examination, whose color is similar to that of the neck, and which appears healthy on all sides, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not swollen, it is necessary to incise it with a dry surface incision from the upper part of the body to the lower part of the body along the line between G and B, and remove its tunic on all sides, separating the two lips of the neck using an inch or multiple inches if necessary, as previously described in the treatment of abscesses on the head, and extract it slowly.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more important to be careful not to incise the vein or nerves.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And the scalpel should not be too sharp or fit too tightly in your hand during incision, nor should it disturb the patient or cause unnecessary cutting; because if you cut into a vein or artery and are prevented from continuing with the operation, then place a piece of vetriol trissat or other powders on the wound to stop bleeding, tighten the area, and leave it inside to rest until the acuteness of the abscess has been relieved, and the area has softened and begun to turn black.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood has been cut off.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	And then return to your operation and complete it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then ask your fingers to examine if there is any remaining cause of the other small scrofula, and incise them and clean them out.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is near the great vein in the region of the large scrofula, then you should not incise that scrofula at its edges.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Beforehand, you should tie it with doubled gall and leave it inside until it comes out on its own without causing harm.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cloth that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment and treat it.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you make an incision in the entire scrofula, then it is important to bring together the two lips of the wound and suture them as soon as possible to prevent any excess fluid from accumulating.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is excess fluid due to the large size of the scrofula, then it is important to understand that you should incise its edge and drain it, and then administer suture as appropriate.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for those scrofulas that contain fluid, make a surface perforation in the area where you see signs of its maturation, and leave an opening on the lower part of the body as previously described.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer cauterization and blistering agents with ointment or similar substances to corrode what remains of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see that the wound has been cleaned out, then treat it with regenerative flesh ointment until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	On the incision of the pilonidal abscess in the gluteal region.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients recommended this incision for an epilhomen abscess, but I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of their sermon.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men with sciatica, the extraction of the pilonidal abscess should be avoided because it does not provide any benefit and all the major veins of the patient are located here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or ears, when the illness is not in the leg, it is necessary to make an incision with a lancet to avoid the danger that is caused by suppuration.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when we want to do this (i.e., make an incision), we should cut along the third circle of the lancet or with a small section perpendicular to the line between two circles. The incision should be on the bone, not the cartilage, and this location is appropriate for cutting because it is free of flesh and close to the blood vessels.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician is inexperienced, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat with a retractor and make an incision in the skin until reaching the canal, but avoid cutting blood vessels for any reason.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then make an incision in the tonsils as we have recommended, and this location is indicated by a flame that appears with the expulsion of pus from the tonsil during the abscess drainage procedure.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, when the time comes to close the wound (i.e., suture it), add two lips of skin from the edges of the wound, but avoid including any cartilage in the sutures.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medications that promote tissue growth until it has healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the essence of what we have discussed (i.e., making an incision in the throat to relieve pressure and prevent complications) is nothing more than a description of cases where some abscesses have filled the patient's throat, and the patient has come close to death. The only option is to make an incision in the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the wound and avoid suffocation, thus being saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for this reason, I recommend leaving the wound open until the danger of the illness has passed, which is typically three days. Once that time has passed, then close and care for the wound until it has healed completely.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have personally witnessed is a maidservant who took a knife and inserted it into her own throat, making an incision in one of her lung lobes. She called me for treatment, and when I arrived, I found her moaning like a dying person. When I examined her, I discovered the wound and saw that blood was flowing from it, indicating that she had caused serious damage to herself.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I admitted that she had not cut a vein or artery, but rather the blood was flowing from the wound itself, and I treated her until she was fully recovered.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And she did not suffer any negative consequences from the incident, except for some temporary hoarseness in her voice, but within a few days, she had fully regained her strength and mobility.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no cause for concern in the incision made by the lancet.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	On making an incision for abscesses that occur in the external throat region, and are referred to as "neck hernias."
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	The abscess known as a "hernia of the throat" is typically large and may be more common in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And this abscess can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And the naturally occurring type is not easily cured.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidentally occurring type can occur in two ways: either resembling fatty nodes or resembling an abscess that is caused by a blocked artery, and this latter case poses a significant risk of complications.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And one should not be overly aggressive with surgical instruments in treating this condition unless it is very small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you should probe and examine the abscess carefully. If it resembles fatty nodes and is not attached to any veins, then you can make an incision in it just as you would for other nodes, draining it of its contents and removing the outer skin and membrane. However, if it does not resemble fatty nodes or appears to be connected to a vein, then it must be thoroughly examined and treated with appropriate medical care until it heals completely.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On making incisions for various types of nodules.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	There are many types of nodules, and I have already discussed all the different kinds in my previous classification.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And it is important for me to clarify the difference between a nodule and an abscess, in order to avoid confusion.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, I say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain due to the buildup of pus. When the boil bursts and releases the excess fluid, the fever, pain, and inflammation subside.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But a nodule is not characterized by heat or fever, nor does it cause pain. It is simply a lump or swelling in the skin that may be present for various reasons, such as a benign growth or cyst.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And nodules are classified based on their color and appearance. They often start out small like a goose bump or pimple, and can be of various sizes. There are two main types of nodules: those that contain fatty tissue and moisture, and the color of which may vary, as I mentioned earlier in my classification.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you are treating a nodule, it is important to first remove any excess tissue and then examine the core of the growth using an instrument called an "intromes," which I will discuss in more detail later in this chapter.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And this is the method for examining abscesses and all types of nodules: you take this instrument, insert it into the wettest part of the growth or abscess, and rotate it slowly until you are sure that it has penetrated through the skin.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then place your hand over the growth or abscess according to its size, and then carefully remove the instrument and examine the contents that have been released from it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the excess moisture has been released and drained, regardless of its color, then you can make a shallow incision using the same method that I described for other types of abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if there is no moisture found in the contents that were released from the instrument, then you can be certain that it was composed of fatty tissue.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And then dry the area using superficial incisions in the shape of a cross like this:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And make the incisions as I have taught you, and then use retractors to hold back the skin surrounding the growth or abscess. Carefully remove any excess tissue from all sides of the area, and preserve the outer layer of skin if possible. Then carefully extract the contents of the growth or abscess along with the node itself.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if the growth or abscess bursts during the procedure, it may not be possible to extract all of its contents, and this is a common occurrence. In such cases, you should carefully remove as much of the contents as possible, leaving behind no residual causes for concern.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	Because if any part of the growth or abscess remains behind, it may return in the future, either slowly or more rapidly depending on its severity.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you notice that any small part of the growth or abscess remains after treatment, then apply some corrosive powder to the wound and strengthen it with a bandage. Place a cauterizing agent over the site of the wound, and treat the remaining area using other appropriate medical techniques until it has fully healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large nodule, then you should suture the two lips of the incision and treat the area with cauterization until it heals completely.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if there is no pulsation or a pulsation in the opposite direction, then you should apply a compress of 30% acetic acid and leave it on for two to three days until the wound has begun to heal and the boil has subsided. Then return to making incisions in any remaining parts of the nodule.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	On the forms and shapes of instruments necessary for incisions and punctures.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	The forms of instruments for making incisions and punctures are of three types: large, medium, and small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The method of internal examination is as follows:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The method of internal examination with a probe is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The method of performing a minor internal examination is as follows:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Use instruments made of iron, stone, or properly sharpened cutting edges to swiftly penetrate abscesses during internal examination.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	These are the forms of surgical probes, and they are named "albered," with one type being called "berid."
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And they come in three varieties, with one being large, another medium-sized, and the third small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The shape of the large surgical probe is as follows:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The shape of the medium-sized surgical probe is as follows:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of the small surgical probe is as follows:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is appropriate that these probes be used for abscesses, discharges, and fistulous tracts, as well as swellings caused by bone infections or other reasons.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are round-tipped, thick, and strong, similar to large needles used for sewing sails, and they can be made of horn (ivory), wood, iron, or silver. However, the best ones are made of ivory horn.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And the probes made of black feathers are used to dilate and open up the entrance of fistulous tracts by reflecting light off their shiny surfaces into the concavity of the tract, thereby facilitating entry.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they come in three varieties, with some being long, others medium-sized, and others short, depending on the size of the opening and constriction of the fistulous tract.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The shape of the large probe made of lead is as follows:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	The shape of the medium-sized probe made of lead is as follows:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	The shape of the small probe made of lead is as follows:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the probes called "onci" (meaning "ounce") come in many varieties, including some with a simple curve and three sizes: large, small, and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of these probes called "onci," some have handles, and they come in three varieties.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these probes called "onci," some have two curves, and they come in three varieties.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And some of these probes called "onci" have three curves and come in three varieties.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary for their respective uses.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The shape of the large single-curve probe called "onci" is as follows:
Forma de unci simple migier:	The shape of the medium-sized single-curve probe called "onci" is as follows:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of the small single-curve probe called "onci" is as follows:
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of the large probe with a handle called "unci" is as follows:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	The shape of the medium-sized probe with a handle called "unci" is as follows:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	The shape of the small probe with a handle called "unci" is as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of the large probe with two curves called "unci" is as follows:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	The shape of the medium-sized probe with two curves called "unci" is as follows:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	The shape of the small probe with two curves called "unci" is as follows:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of the large probe with three curves called "unci" is as follows:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of the medium-sized probe with three curves called "unci" is as follows:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The shape of the small probe with three curves called "unci" is as follows:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the shapes of the scalpels used for cutting and scraping nodes and abscesses, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	The shape of the large surgical knife called "scapel" is as follows:
Forma del scapel migier:	The shape of the medium-sized surgical knife called "scapel" is as follows:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Method of scalpel little:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those wounds that are made by cutting should be sharp and the other extremities not sharp, and they should not be placed in such a way, but rather so that assistance is provided in the excision of nodes, and through them the patient may heal and find some relief through the drying out which occurs with the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of almagates (a type of plaster), and they come in three species: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of the large one (almagate):
Forma de magda migier:	The form of the medium-sized one (almagate):
Forma de magda pauc:	The form of the small one (almagate):
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of clay and have a similar shape to rays, with which they are made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the pointed extremity (of the clay form) that there are hidden punctures made with a spatula, which reach both inside and outside, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the said (clay) forms for the puncturing of abscesses and are not noticed by the patients, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of them (spatulas):
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cups (used for bloodletting) with which the flow of blood is cut off, and they come in three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of these are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of clay, round in shape and somewhat elongated, and they are thin (or delicate).
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And it is necessary that these species of cups be large, medium, and small in size, so that through them the flow of blood may be cut off quickly in times of need, and also when there is no other medicine available at first.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use these to cut off the flow of blood in any location on the body, and do so only in fleshy areas, such as the upper arms and thighs, and the forearms, breasts, stomach, and groin, and similar areas to those that are fleshy and warm.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And some times it is necessary to use other small instruments similar to this one, which are shaped like the tips of purses (or bags) according to this form; through which the blood is cut off when it is done through flebotomy (or phlebotomy), or for the incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And some times they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter 47.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	On the care of the male breasts, which are similar to those of women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some times the breasts of some men become swollen due to an excess of fluid that accumulates during sleep, and similarly, the breasts of women can also become swollen and resemble abscesses or tumors.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And for those who suffer from this condition, it is necessary to make an incision in the form of a crescent moon along the line between points B and G (as shown in the diagram), and then excise all of the thickened tissue and apply a carminative medicine to the wound. Then, bring together the edges of the wound with sutures and continue to care for it until it has healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the breast sags downwards and becomes soft due to its size, as is common in women, then it should be cut along two lines on either side of the nipple, with two crescent-shaped incisions that fit together like a moon shape, as shown in the diagram. Then, excise the fatty tissue that lies between the two lips of the wound and remove any excess fluid. Apply the sutures and powders as necessary for the healing process until the wound is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you are unable to complete the incision as necessary due to the patient's discomfort or excessive bleeding, then it is necessary to pack the wound with a piece of cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it in place until the affected tissue has been dissolved and removed. Then, continue to care for the wound until it has healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	On the puncturing of abscesses that cause itching in the lower parts (of the body).
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that cause itching in the lower parts are of the type known as scrofula (or scrofulous swellings), which have a hard consistency and are covered with a thick layer of skin.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those (abscesses) that contain moisture, it is necessary to make an incision in the shape of a crescent moon along the line between points G and B (as shown in the diagram). Once all of the pus has been evacuated from the abscess and the wound has been cleaned, then pack the wound with a piece of clean cloth and leave it in place for one day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	Then the cloth should be left in place and cared for with a suitable ointment until the wound has healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the type that forms in lymph nodes (or glands), or is a hard, chronic swelling (such as scrofula), then you should make an incision over it in the same way as described for scrofulous swellings.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extensive and affects areas of exposed flesh, then apply a hot iron (or cautery) as previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter 49.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of abscesses that occur in an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured and a clot has formed above it, many abscesses often occur, and the signs by which one can recognize that inflammation and abscess come from the artery or vein are: for when an abscess comes from an artery, it is elongated in the region of the body; and if you press the abscess with your fingers, you will feel a sound like stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And one that comes from a vein is round and visible on the surface of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	Incision on this abscess is dangerous, especially in areas such as the armpits, groin, neck, and other parts of the body; and if it is large, then surgical treatment should be avoided. Similarly, incisions near the extremities or the head should be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But for one that is located deep in the body due to inflammation of the orifice of an artery, make an incision in the clot along its length; then separate the incision with forceps and move aside the artery, and deliver it from the surrounding tissue so that it is exposed.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	Then place a needle over the incision and insert it into the other layer (of tissue), and tie off the artery with double-strength thread in two places, which causes hemostasis (stopping of bleeding) during the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	Then place your finger on the location between two ligaments and apply warm salve to it until all of the blood in it is resolved and the abscess disappears.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then administer treatment to the area where pus is generated between the ligaments, and apply appropriate ointments until it heals.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is due to rupture of a vein, then you should hold the clot with your hand as close to the abscess as possible, and insert the needle below the area where you have placed your hand, and push it in. The needle should be double-threaded so that you can extract the contents from the other layer. Then tie off the abscess using a strong ligament in two parts with both ends of the thread, as I have told you before.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you are afraid that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the suture along with the needle below the entire abscess, and tighten the sutures in four places along the incision made by the first needle.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then drain the abscess in the middle of it until what is inside comes out, and then make an incision in the excess clot and leave what remains attached.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place over it a poultice that you have soaked in wine and oil, and apply the treatment consisting of warm compresses and ointments until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1: Abscess caused by nerve twisting.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Just as abscesses occur in arteries and veins, so too do they occur in nerves when there is a blow or excessive pressure, and similarly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is most commonly found in the joints of the limbs or feet, or any location where the joints are poorly aligned.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a serious abscess, with a color similar to that of other parts of the body, and it is located in the most prominent areas of the body, and when it becomes tight with force, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not an abscess that forms in the region of the body, but rather beneath the skin, and it extends equally in all directions and does not move forward or backward.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, for those that are located in the joints, it is not advisable to be treated with incisions, because a contracture will easily develop.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But for those that are located on the head or forehead, make an incision in the skin with a scalpel.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then use forceps to remove it by cutting with scissors.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if it is large, then use hooks to lift and remove the abscess, and then stitch the wound closed and apply appropriate medical treatment until it heals.
Capitol .li.	Chapter IV.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Chapter IV: Abscesses caused by inflammation of the abdomen or intestines.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	It often happens that humans have many abscesses in their bellies and other parts of the body, which are called fungal-like due to their similarity with mushrooms, whose root is thin but the head is large, and the lips of these abscesses are turned inward, they are small or very enlarged.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have seen one where there were two parts in the belly that resembled mushrooms, and there was no difference between them in color or size.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And the lips of these abscesses were turned inward and split open, and a constant flow of moisture came from them.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I incised those and found in one of them pus weighing eighteen ounces. And the other one weighed five ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation during incision should be that you consider whether the patient is humid and their complexion is white, moist, and of subtle veins. If so, then you should make a wide incision with a scalpel, and have cauteries in the fire nearby because many times the wound will expel much blood, and if it does, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see that the patient is weak and fearful, then be cautious of incision with a scalpel, but instead use fresh lead filings, strengthen it with this material in the manner we described earlier, and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then secure it with a strip of lead, and make sure to tighten the large bandage on the affected area until it is cut off and falls away by itself without any effort.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the abscess is of thick veins, then there is some cause for fear and concern during incision, especially if it is located in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But it is possible that you can incise the entirety of it, and then cauterize it to prevent its return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then take care of it until the wound heals.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And be careful not to presume to incise a tumor that is of dark color, with little sensation and hard texture, for it may be cancerous.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come back with a reminder about cancer later.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter II.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Chapter II: On the treatment of navel prominence (umbilical hernia).
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	A prominence of the navel can be caused by many factors, such as a tear in the diaphragm that is above the belly, and part of its membrane or bowel protrudes through it, just like with other ruptures; or due to blood that flows from a vein or artery, as mentioned earlier; or due to trapped wind in the intestines.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is due to a tear in the diaphragm and protrusion of the membrane or bowel, then the abscess will be similar in color to the surrounding skin, and it will not be painful; however, its appearance can vary.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	If it is due to protrusion of the bowel, then its appearance will vary more significantly from what was previously described, and when you press on it with your fingers, it disappears and returns easily; however, it can also become much larger in warm baths and with significant exertion.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is due to moisture, then it will not be painful and will not disappear when you press on it with your hand. It will also not be constricted or hardened.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	If it is due to blood, then the abscess will have these signs: darkening in color.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is due to cartilage or gristle, then the abscess will be severe, large and hard, and its size will depend on the amount of cartilage present.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is due to trapped wind or gas, then touching it will not cause pain.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation for this condition involves determining whether the navel prominence is due to blood from an artery or vein, or trapped wind. If so, then you must refrain from treating it, as there is a risk of causing further harm, just as I have taught in the chapter on abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestines or the skin, it is necessary to instruct the patient to tighten their abdominal muscles and stand upright; then gently press around the entire umbilicus, and command them to lie down between your hands with their hips on your lap, and then circle around the umbilicus with a spatula at the marked spot; then extend the swelling to the parts above using a large probe; and then bind it in the circumference with strong ligatures or ceda and in a proper manner.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then introduce the middle of the abscess over the ligament and insert your finger into it to search for the intestine; and if you have found and protected it through the ligament, then you extract gently and push the intestines back inside the abdomen.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the skin, then grasp it with a probe and incise the excess portion of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, then surround that area and return to your operation; and take two needles and put strong sutures on them and insert those two needles in the circuit that you have made around the abscess like a cross, and then press the abscess onto the needles in four parts.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area open so that the flesh can spread out and fall by itself; or cut what has become thin and is possible to cut, and then treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to flesh or moisture, then it is necessary for you to lance the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with appropriate remedies that will solidify the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	"On the treatment of cancer"
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As we have said in the division, on the type of cancer and in what manner it can be treated with medicine, and that it is advisable to treat it with surgery rather than allowing it to ulcerate; and we have said that cancer arises from negligence in its care.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The ancients said that some types of cancer can be eradicated from the place where it is located, such as cancer in areas where it is possible to remove all of it, such as breast cancer or cancer in the thigh, and similarly in other locations on the body; and this is most effective when it is started small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is advanced and large, one should not attempt to treat it, because I have not been able to cure such a case nor have I seen anyone else do so, nor has there been any success in this regard.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation for it (cancer) when it is located as we have said, is that you proceed and let the patient take some purgatives to cleanse black bile, and then bleed them if a manifest plethora is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then, prepare the patient for the operation with preparation that includes location for the operation, and also provide them with pointed instruments that are necessary for it; and also make sure that the wound is completely hollowed out, leaving no cause of its roots.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood flow, and do not cut it lightly, and press on the areas and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument that is within your reach.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if you encounter thick blood flow due to injury of a vein or artery, then cauterize it in order to stop the bleeding and then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
Capitol .liv.	"Chapter 54"
De curacio de ydropici.	"On the treatment of hydropsy"
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recommended, in the division, the different types of hydropsy and their symptoms, as well as the treatment of each type with medicine.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And the type of hydropsy that can be cured with surgery is only the variety of ascites alone, and it should not be attempted to operate on the varieties of tympanites or hypochondria, as this would be fatal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have treated this type of hydropsy timpanites with medicine and do not see improvement in the patient's condition, then consider that if the patient is already weakened by the disease or has another form of dropsy elsewhere in the body, such as cough or abdominal pain, then be cautious and do not treat them with surgery, for there is danger in doing so.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient with abundant vitality, and they have no other illness but dropsy alone, and not infant or elderly, then the method of operating on them is as follows: you lift the patient between your arms, and administer to them an enema to their belly with their hand, milk the water downwards past the navel, and then take a sponge full of:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	a sponge that is long on two sides, with a sharp point like a spatula; but make sure it is of moderate length, little by little, so that in the operation with this you do not penetrate into the intestine, and only touch it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the dropsy is caused by an issue with the intestines, because in that case you must make the incision at a distance of three fingers below the navel on the right side of the body.[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/pentenilh)
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the dropsy is caused by a liver illness, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel at a distance of three fingers.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the dropsy is caused by a spleen illness, then your incision should be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	It is not necessary for your incision to be on the side where the patient wants to lie, because this could cause excess fluids to accumulate in that area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	Then perforate the entire intestine with your instrument and enter that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the intestine and the mesentery, and extract it; if it is the quantity of a fingernail or about so.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	Then perforate the mesentery until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water is.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it resembles a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or iron, with a small hole at the lower end and three holes on both sides; two of them on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is sharpened like a feather, as you see. [[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/argent)](https://www.definitions.net/definition/eram)
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And on the upper end of it is a valve, because when the instrument reaches the water, then that valve opens immediately and allows the water to flow out in half the quantity, because if you extract more than necessary at once, this could cause the patient's animal spirit to dissolve or lead to death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But extract according to the patient's vitality and according to what their physical condition, pulse, and overall health indicate to you.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then extract the instrument and retain the water that is causing this because it is immediately retained by the intestine, which blocks the hole on the mesentery; I remind you to perforate it in that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	Then insert the instrument again on the following day if you see that the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, doing this for several days with caution, and be careful not to leave any water in there, but only a little.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you are concerned about the patient's health and leave a large amount of water, then treat them with burial in hot sand and fomentation with steam in a bath, and expose them to the sun for a long time; and treat them with drying medications until they are healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, liver, and spleen during the water extraction process, as I have mentioned earlier in what has been previously written.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter 59.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary tracts.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb and the head of their genitalia is not perforated (or the hole is narrow or not in its proper place). [](https://www.definitions.net/definition/genitalia) [[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/loc)](https://www.definitions.net/definition/perforated)
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to cut and perforate the genitalia immediately after birth with a very thin spatula in this manner:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then insert a slender nail of lead into the hole and tie it in place, leaving it there for three or four days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they feel the need to urinate, remove the nail. Then replace it once they have finished urinating and leave it in place again.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not insert the lead nail, it is possible that the urine will flow out of the hole and miss the nail.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But for those with a narrow hole, insert a lead nail as mentioned earlier for several days until it becomes larger.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But for those with the hole in the wrong place, there is this condition because in such cases, the hole is at the end of the penis and they cannot urinate downwards, but instead must raise their penis with their hand to direct the urine upwards. This problem is not present at birth, but occurs later when semen can no longer reach the mother due to this malformation, which is a serious issue.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The method of the operation for this condition is as follows: have the patient lie on their back, then extend the head of their penis with your left hand using strong force. Then use a sharp spatula to incise the head of the penis at the location of the prepuce, making an incision that resembles a feather quill or a sharp edge. The goal is to create a new hole in the correct location so that it aligns with the original hole as necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Be careful not to cut into the blood vessels during your operation as this can easily happen and cause bleeding. Use a tool that cuts the blood vessels and apply it to the wound until it stops bleeding. Take care of the wound until it heals.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter 65.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of albugo, which occurs in the prepuce of the penis, and the corruption, darkness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Often, this condition of albugo appears as an excess of fleshy growth on the penis and is considered a serious issue. This excess flesh can make it difficult for the individual to urinate or engage in sexual activity. In some cases, it may also lead to infection or other complications if left untreated. [[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/penis)](https://www.definitions.net/definition/excess)[[](https://www.definitions.net/definition/fleshy)](https://www.definitions.net/definition/growth)
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of these, one type is malignant and the other is non-malignant. Malignant cases are characterized by rapid growth and spread of the albugo beyond the prepuce and into the surrounding tissues. In severe cases, it may even invade the bloodstream and metastasize to distant organs such as the lungs or liver. Non-malignant cases, on the other hand, tend to grow more slowly and are generally confined to the prepuce. They may cause discomfort or difficulty urinating but do not pose a serious threat to health unless left untreated.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	For non-malignant cases, it is necessary to use fine hooks to remove the albugo and clean the area thoroughly. Then place a piece of cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment on the wound, followed by treatment with deficient ointment until healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	But if the albugo is malignant and has a dark color, then it is necessary to apply cautery to the incision and remove the entire growth. This procedure will require skill and experience to avoid damaging surrounding tissue or causing excessive bleeding. It is important to follow proper aftercare instructions to prevent infection and promote healing.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if the albugo is in the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of it is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then it is necessary to remove the albugo that is inside at the beginning until it becomes solidified. After that, you can treat the exterior part because if you treat both parts together with the foreskin, there is no guarantee that it will not be injured.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if you see blackness or corruption in the genitalia and foreskin, then it is necessary to remove all that has become discolored and will soon rot or is already rotten. Afterwards, apply a poultice made from honey combined with flour of millet and sieved crushed ivy leaves. This treatment can help cleanse the affected area and promote healing.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And then cure the remaining condition with further treatment until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is blood flow, then apply lunar cautery in this manner:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	The reason why lunar cautery is used in two ways at the same time is because it can treat both bleeding and corrupt wounds simultaneously. This type of cautery uses a round shape with smooth edges and is typically made from silver or gold. It can be heated until it is red hot and then used to seal the wound and prevent further blood loss, as well as kill any bacteria present in the area and promote healing.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	If the head of the penis is corroded and destroyed at the time, then it is necessary to insert a lead cannula into the meat of the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the case of adhesion between the foreskin and the head of the penis (and this type of adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is healthy and circumcision has not been performed; but rather, it occurs due to injury or abscess), then it is necessary to scrape with a blunt spatula until the ligaments are dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	If it is difficult to carefully separate the adhesions, then it is necessary to scrape both the head of the penis and the foreskin with a spatula, as this type of scraping can easily penetrate through the thin skin of the foreskin.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a fine thread that has been soaked in water to prevent further adhesion.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And let it be treated with styptic agents so that it becomes solid. (Styptic agents are substances that can help stop bleeding by causing blood vessels to contract and promoting clotting.)
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter 57. (The Roman numeral LVII corresponds to the number 57 in modern Arabic numerals.)
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	On the cleansing of infants and the treatment of what occurs as a result of circumcision. (This chapter likely discusses the care of newborn boys after they have undergone religious circumcision, which was a common practice in medieval Europe.)
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution to injury in the same way as other wounds: but because it is part of our operation and our will, and the foreskin belongs properly to children, it is necessary that we assign the best and easiest method for healing without causing harm. (This suggests that the author views circumcision as a deliberate action with potential risks, and therefore recommends taking extra care in performing and treating the wound.)
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on any of their free men, because it was not used in their laws. And this is only because we have found through experience that the majority of barbers and surgeons use circumcision with a scalpel and hot iron; and they also use cauterization with bile and incisions with a nail. (This passage suggests that circumcision was not a universal practice in ancient cultures, but rather an intervention adopted by certain medical professionals in medieval Europe.)
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already rejected all these methods and have not found better cleansing with forceps, or cauterization with bile as in the method with a nail, because often the foreskin avoids being cut completely, because the foreskin has two layers, and only one layer is removed, leaving the other layer intact, which easily leads to another incision and sure pain. (This passage suggests that the author has tried various methods of circumcision and found them lacking in effectiveness or safety.)
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And the cleansing performed by an alphecat, which is digital, and used by shoemakers, is not safe for incising the tip of the male member, because it easily enters the hole and may cause injury. (This passage suggests that the author views a particular method of circumcision as risky or ineffective.)
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with a nail, it is very easy to injure and corrupt your operation. (This passage suggests that using a nail for circumcision can be harmful or lead to complications.)
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and many times it happens in such a way that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this myself. (This passage suggests that circumcision may not be necessary or beneficial for all children, as some may naturally have short enough foreskins that do not require surgical intervention.)
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But I have found through experience that the cleansing performed with forceps and cauterization with bile is better, because the forceps allow for precise incisions, as the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. And so when you press your hand proportionately, you make an incision according to a ratio in a set amount of time; and compression of the bile is performed using a figure that encloses the foreskin completely, with which no error can occur. (This passage suggests that the author prefers a particular method of circumcision because it allows for more precise incisions and reduces the risk of complications.)
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the method of the first operation is that you place the child in a comfortable position if he is small, and only apply bile to his foreskin, allowing it to remain there for another day. (This passage suggests that the author recommends a gentle and gradual approach to circumcision, particularly for younger children.)
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And do everything possible to comfort and reassure the child during the procedure, so that he is calm and receptive to what is happening. (This passage suggests that the author values the emotional well-being of the child undergoing circumcision, and recommends taking steps to reduce anxiety and fear.)
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And also ensure that the child is held securely and calmly by your assistants, without any distractions, and hide the forceps or other instruments from his view. (This passage suggests that the author recommends taking steps to minimize the child's exposure to stressful or frightening stimuli during the procedure.)
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And also place your hand on the child's foreskin and gently blow on it to relax and dilate the skin, then use your forceps to carefully remove any debris or dirt that has accumulated there. (This passage suggests that the author recommends taking a gentle and careful approach to cleansing the foreskin, in order to minimize discomfort or injury.) [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS\_U0Q2lE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS_U0Q2lE)
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And also apply a double layer of bile to the incision site, and tie a ligature around it with a small knot, then use your forceps to gently pull the skin taut and make an incision between the two ligatures. (This passage suggests that the author recommends using a ligature or suture to control bleeding and promote healing after making the incision.)
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And also gently lift the foreskin and expose the head of the penis, allowing any blood to flow out slowly, which is preferable. Then apply a powder made from hog's lard and rose oil mixed with water to the wound, and cover it with a dressing. Leave this in place for a day or two, until the wound has begun to heal, and continue to care for it with appropriate dressings and treatments until it is fully healed. (This passage suggests that the author recommends using gentle compression and natural remedies to promote healing and reduce scarring after circumcision.)
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps used in this cleansing procedure is as follows: (This passage likely includes a diagram or illustration of the recommended forceps shape and size.)
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The ends of the forceps should be blunt and the other ends should be sharp, so that the tips do not protrude beyond the claws. The length of both cutting edges should be equal to the length of the two handles. (This passage describes the recommended shape and size of the forceps used in this cleansing procedure.)
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the risk in this cleansing procedure is that it is easy for the foreskin to avoid being completely cut or for only a portion of it to be cut during the incision. (This passage highlights the potential risks and challenges associated with performing a cleansing procedure using forceps.)
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, it is necessary for you to stretch the foreskin outwards with your fingernail before making the incision, and then make the incision evenly according to the proper ratio or proportion. (This passage emphasizes the importance of careful preparation and precise technique in performing a cleansing procedure using forceps.)
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you are unable to stretch the foreskin outwards with your fingernail, then use a hook or forceps to pull it taut and make the incision. (This passage provides an alternative technique for preparing the foreskin before making the incision during a cleansing procedure.)
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed and there is still swelling or inflammation under the foreskin, then you should wait until the swelling has subsided and gently remove any excess skin before making the incision according to your prepared plan. (This passage suggests that it may be necessary to delay the cleansing procedure if there is evidence of infection or other complications.)
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And be careful not to injure the head of the penis during the procedure, as this can lead to further complications. (This passage emphasizes the importance of avoiding injury to sensitive areas during the cleansing procedure.)
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, care for the wound with the powders that we recommended in the treatise on powders, in order to promote healing and prevent infection. (This passage suggests that the author may have written other texts or treatises on medical topics, and recommends using specific powders as part of the post-procedure care.)
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if too much foreskin is removed and it extends beyond the incision site, this should not be of concern. (This passage suggests that there may be some variation in the amount of skin removed during the cleansing procedure, and that this is not necessarily problematic.)
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And continue to care for the wound according to our instructions until it has fully healed. (This passage emphasizes the importance of post-procedure care and follow-up treatment to ensure proper healing.)
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter 58. (This marks the beginning of a new chapter or section in the medical text.)
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	On the treatment of urinary retention in the bladder. (This chapter likely discusses various methods for treating bladder problems, including difficulties with urination or incontinence.)
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Urinary retention in the bladder can be caused by obstruction due to a stone or congealed blood, or by pus or flesh, and is similar to what we have described in our discussion of treatment methods. (This passage suggests that urinary retention may be related to other medical conditions or factors, such as kidney stones or infections.) [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS\_U0Q2lE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS_U0Q2lE)
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved and there is evidence of retention due to a stone in the bladder, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their hips elevated. (This passage suggests that one possible treatment for bladder stones or other obstructions causing urinary retention is to position the patient in a way that facilitates urination and promotes drainage of the bladder.) [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS\_U0Q2lE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS_U0Q2lE)
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And also position the patient's legs over their hips and extend their abdomen from the area above their hips, while the patient tightens their muscles as much as they are able. (This passage suggests that physical therapy or exercise may be helpful in promoting urination and relieving symptoms of urinary retention.) [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS\_U0Q2lE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS_U0Q2lE)
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, when the bladder neck is constricted and the stone is expelled backwards, the urine will be released. (This passage suggests that one possible treatment for bladder stones or other obstructions causing urinary retention is to manipulate the position of the patient's body in order to encourage the stone to move out of the bladder and into the urethra, where it can be expelled from the body through urination.) [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS\_U0Q2lE](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s1qS_U0Q2lE)
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if the cause has not been dissolved with what we have mentioned earlier and it has become more severe for the patient, then it is necessary to administer a procedure using an instrument called a syringe, which looks like this: It should be made of silver and be delicate and concave, similar to a bird's quill with the slenderness of a long ray of palm and a half in length, and have a thin cannula at its head.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	The method of extracting urine with the syringe is to take some gall liquid and bind it with wool or cotton at its extremity, and then insert the ends of the gall into the lower part of the syringe. Use forceps to remove any excess wool that may be in the way, but gently insert it into the cannula with force. Then slowly push the syringe in with a rod and albumen of egg white.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And apply a blistering agent to the patient on the shin, prick the bladder and penis with oils that are wet, olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then gently insert the syringe until it reaches the root of the penis; then bend the penis upwards towards the bladder; and then push the syringe further in; and then press the area until the urine flows into the empty causeway, and this should be done in order. But if not, then it will go in a twisted way.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And slowly extract the gall with wool little by little, because the urine soaks the wool.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then remove it and use the syringe to cure the urine, do not stop doing this with a syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Regarding the quality of bladder irrigation with a clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose, it is important to choose the right tools and techniques to ensure effective and safe irrigation of the bladder. The clamp should be made of sturdy, rust-resistant material such as stainless steel or titanium, and should have smooth jaws to prevent damage to the urethra or bladder tissue.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is an ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or blood clots have formed in it, or it has become obstructed by a stone, and you want to introduce water and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a "clampcedra," which looks like this:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	Instead, at the end of it, it is closed or obstructed. This phrase suggests that there may be an obstruction in the urethra preventing the flow of urine or irrigating solution. It emphasizes the importance of carefully checking for any blockages before attempting bladder irrigation with a clampcedra or other instrument. If an obstruction is found, it may need to be removed or bypassed before proceedon can continue.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three holes: two on one side, like this (X). This phrase refers to the design of the clampcedra instrument, which typically has three openings or ports. Two of these holes are located on the same side of the cannula and are used for introducing water or medicine into the bladder. The third hole is located on the opposite side of the cannula and serves as an exit port for urine or other fluids that may be present in the bladder.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, it is concave in shape, which is what is inserted, and this is done according to the amount that is necessary. Until when any cause is pulled with humidity, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled, it is pulled out again, and when it is expelled long, like a clampcedra used for pouring naphtha in naval battles.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, if you wish to introduce fluid into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the fluid and pull it upwards with the bulb, as the fluid will be drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra. This passage describes the process of using the clampcedra instrument to introduce water or medicine into the bladder through one of the two openings on the side of the cannula.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clampcedra into the penis as we have recommended with the syringe; and push the fluid with what you are pushing, so that the fluid reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it. This passage describes how to use the clampcedra instrument to introduce water or medicine directly into the bladder through the urethra.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The form of the subtle catheter with which the bladder is irrigated, and this is its shape: This passage describes the design and function of a type of medical instrument called a "subtle catheter," which is used for bladder irrigation. The phrase "la vesica es cristerizada" can be translated as "the bladder is irrigated," indicating that this procedure involves introducing water or medicine into the bladder through the urethra.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it should be made of silver or lead, in which the head is most similar to a small feather, and the cannula inside it gently. This passage provides more information about the design of the subtle catheter used for bladder irrigation. It specifies that the instrument can be made of either silver or lead, both of which are durable materials that can withstand repeated use without breaking or wearing down.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then you take the bladder by force and place in it the fluid that you want to irrigate in the bladder, and then you tie it tightly with two strong ligatures of double gall, and you heat the fluid over the fire. This passage describes the steps for preparing a solution to be used for bladder irrigation using the subtle catheter.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then insert the end of the irrigator into the penis. This phrase suggests that once the solution has been prepared, the physician would then use the subtle catheter to introduce it into the bladder through the urethra. The phrase "entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua" can be translated as "insert the end of the irrigator into the penis," emphasizing the need for careful and controlled insertion of the catheter. By following this step-by-step guide, physicians could ensure that their patients received safe and effective bladder irrigation, even in cases where the bladder was obstructed or otherwise difficult to access.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then you press firmly with your hand on the bladder with the fluid, with gentle pressure until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder. This phrase suggests that after inserting the subtle catheter into the urethra and introducing the solution into the bladder, the physician would then use their hand to apply gentle pressure on the abdomen, just above the pubic bone. The phrase "estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat" means "press firmly with your hand on the bladder with the fluid," emphasizing the need for careful and controlled application of pressure.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if the bladder is not present, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and perforate it completely with its roundness; and then insert strong gall into those holes, so that they are turned inside out; and then add the circle as if it were a funnel, so that it is attached securely, since you place in it what you want from liquids, oils, and waters. This passage describes an alternative method for introducing fluids into the bladder when direct access to the organ is not possible.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And you should tie that one in the instrument and do the same as you did with the bladder, and express with your hand so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	On the extraction of stones (or calculi).
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the types of stones and their cures with medications, and the difference between a stone generated in the kidneys and one generated in the bladder, as well as its symptoms.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said that a stone can be operated on with the hand and cut out.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And a stone generated in the bladder properly speaking is one that is located in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I will now narrate this with clear exposition and brevity.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that a stone generated in the bladder is most commonly found in children; and its symptoms include urine that resembles water in its subtlety and appears cloudy, with sand or sediment present; and the patient experiences pain when passing urine, with frequent urgency and straining; and there may also be redness and swelling around the anus.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And the healing of children with this is usually achieved before they reach 14 years old; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in young adults it is easier because it occurs between them.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And in cases where the stone is larger and its cure is more difficult; and if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, as we begin the cure for that, it is necessary to cleanse the patient with a clyster, which will extract all the folds that are in their intestines; for those folds sometimes prevent the formation of stones due to the investigation of them.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	Then the patient should be positioned with their feet raised and turned on their side, so that the stone may descend to the bottom of the bladder or exit its current location.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	Then perform the cautery between your fingers, prepared and positioned as follows: let the patient's buttocks be clear of any obstacles, and ensure that the bladder is completely emptied by having them urinate before beginning the procedure.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	Then locate and remove the stone entirely from outside the body.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should quickly cut into it with a sharp instrument.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you have not completely extracted the stone with your incision, then it is necessary to apply oil from your left index finger (if the patient is a child) or your middle finger (if the patient is an adult) to the tip of your right index finger, and insert that finger into the patient's rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	Then continue to search for the stone until it is completely below your finger.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And gradually move the stone upwards towards the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply pressure with your finger to the stone and push it outwards through the incision you made.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And instruct the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand, and instruct another assistant to extend the patient's legs upwards with their right hand, while using their left hand to support the lower back below the genitals, in the area near where the incision is being made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then insert a spatula with a sharp edge that is shaped like this:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	and make an incision in the area between the buttocks and the genitals, not too close to the anus but rather towards the left thigh; position the incision over the stone, with your finger inside the rectum and making a transverse cut so that the incision on the outside is wider than on the inside, as much as possible without causing excessive pressure on the surrounding tissue. This will allow you to extract the stone more easily while minimizing risk of injury or complications.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that some stones have sharp angles or edges, which can make their expulsion difficult.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And some stones are similar in shape to a lion's claw, round and smooth, making their expulsion relatively easy.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	And if it is one with sharp angles or edges, adjust to fit in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not easily expelled, then you should apply pressure to it or pull on it with a gentle tug, using an instrument with a curved tip that is similar to a file and that can be moved back and forth over the stone without causing damage. Alternatively, you could insert a thin, curved instrument beneath the stone to lift it out.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you are unable to do so, then widen the incision slightly and, if you see a flow of blood, cut it away with a three-times heated vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you should push your hand into the bladder and make an incision over it, and similarly push a little further in for each additional stone, making an incision over each one as needed.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the stone is very large, then it is important to note that making a large incision can lead to two potential negative outcomes: either the patient will experience significant bleeding or they will develop chronic urinary leakage due to incomplete healing of the bladder wall.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But if the stone is large, then you should attempt to extract it whole before making any incisions, or use forceps to break it up into smaller pieces that can be removed more easily.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	And once you have completed your procedure, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood sap, and apply strength to it.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and water, over it, in order to prevent infection and promote healing.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then have the patient lie on their back with their hips elevated, and do not remove the bandages for at least three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when the area is laid open, irrigate the wound with water and a little oil, and then cure it with bergamot oil and dziban oil until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if pus forms in the wound and it becomes inflamed and corroded, appearing as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, causing urine retention (which can be recognized by the presence of blood in the urine), then introduce your finger into the wound and remove the clotted blood. This must be done because if it remains, it may cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply the appropriate dressing for the healing process until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And during the entire healing process, you should keep the patient's thighs bound and adjust the medications that have been applied to the wound.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the stone is small and located in the meat of the penis, and has become impacted there, causing urine retention, then cure it with what I recommended earlier before you reach for the knife. This is because many are accused of castration through this type of healing process; and this is proven, and it is that you should take an awl-shaped iron instrument, which has this form:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	with a triangular extremity, sharp, inserted in a handle.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then take bile and tie it to the penis below the stone, so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	Then insert the instrument into the penis, penetrating with ease until it reaches the stone.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And rotate the awl with your hand in the stone little by little, gradually enlarging the hole until it allows for the passage of the other part; for urine flow will be restored immediately.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	Then press your hand on what remains of the stone from the outside of the penis, for it is trapped and expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this healing process is not feasible for some reason that prevents it, then tie a bile to the area below the stone and another one above it.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then apply a ligature around the penis on both sides of the stone.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then remove it.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then undo the ligature and clean the coagulated blood in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie the bile below the stone, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above it should be removed when the bile is untied, because when the bile is released, the kidney returns to its place and heals the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And so it is necessary when you tie the bile above, that you lift the kidney to the upper parts or make sure it returns to its place and heals the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter 61.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	On the removal of bladder stones in women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Bladder stones are rarely generated in women.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a stone is detected in any of them, then the healing process is difficult and forbidden in many ways.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of the reasons is that women are easily frightened.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second reason is that it is difficult to find a skillful woman who can determine whether she is chaste or married when she exposes herself to the doctor.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third reason is that it is difficult to find a skillful woman who knows this art, especially the surgical procedure with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	The fourth reason is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is far from the location of the stone itself, which requires a deep incision and creates fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity compels you to do so, then it is advisable to find a knowledgeable and experienced woman, but they are rare.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you do not have access to such a woman, then seek out a wise and clever midwife, or present a mature woman who is experienced in the matters of women, or a woman who has some experience in this art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, make the presentation and order her to do everything that you command, starting with the examination of the stone, which will help determine whether the woman is a virgin or not. If she is a virgin, then she must insert her finger into the anus and search for the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if she finds it, then compress it with her finger and order her to make an incision above the stone.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then order the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder and applying gentle pressure.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if she finds it, then gradually move the stone from the urethra to the lower parts towards the buttocks with the help of her skill and strength until it reaches the area between the thighs.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then make an incision at the tip of the labia majora near the area between the thighs where it is easily accessible and centered on the stone, ensuring that the mouth of the incision is not obstructed by the stone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And make the incision small at first, and then insert the scalpel into the incision and if you feel the stone, adjust the depth of the incision according to the size of the stone that you know will be expelled through it.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the types of stones are many: some are small and large, hard and rough, long and round, and have projections.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore you will know how many types there are of it by what you signify about it regarding what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you want to stop bleeding, apply a mixture of three parts vinegar and one part copper sulfate to the area for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is expelled.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And make sure that you prepare the same instruments as those mentioned in the removal of stones in men, so that you are assisted by them in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is due to an artery being cut, then put powder on the area and tighten it with a compress and binding material, but do not repeat this; and leave the stone alone and do not extract it, because the patient will soon die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then heal the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	When the intensity of the bleeding has subsided after several days, and the wound begins to dry, then you may return to your operation once the stone is expelled.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter 62. (This is a guess based on the format commonly used in medieval manuscripts where each chapter or section was numbered)
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	On the section concerning inguinal hernia. (In this context, "ernia acoza" refers to an inguinal hernia)
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	An inguinal hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white region below the abdomen, which protrudes through the opening in the groin containing the spermatic cord, and is called a "ciphac." (Note: "codena" refers to the spermatic cord)
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	Sometimes it is located in the actual scrotal tissue that nature has prepared in the region of the genitals during embryonic development, until it becomes distinct as a separate organ; and this is the spermatic cord within the white region we mentioned earlier, which is nothing but fat. (Note: "pannicol" refers to the scrotal tissue)
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	The formation of this hernia occurs due to weakness in the abdominal muscles, which causes this material to protrude, and sometimes it happens as a result of trauma or injury to the groin area. (Note: "debelitat" refers to weakness)
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this moisture can have different colors, as its color can vary from yellowish or reddish to purplish, black and slimy, or clear and watery, and these are the most common variations. (Note: "motas" means many)
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs that indicate where this accumulation of moisture is located are: if it is in the white region we mentioned earlier, then a swelling appears, roundish and slightly elongated, similar to an egg shape, and the genitals become visible, as the moisture affects them from all sides. (Note: "apostema" refers to a swelling)
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the moisture is located in the actual scrotal tissue, then the swelling appears round with an egg-like shape, and therefore people often mistake it for another testicle.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the moisture is between the spermatic cord and the white region of the groin, then it can be felt by palpation. (Note: "catz" refers to feeling with hands)
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to determine the color of the moisture, then press on the swelling with your fingers in a circular motion, following the shape of the circumference, and based on what comes out from the pressure, judge its nature and composition. (Note: "entromes" refers to fingertips) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to treating it with iron (referring to surgical instruments), then it is advisable to instruct the patient to undergo venesection (bloodletting) if possible, and sometimes empty their bowels as well. (Note: "ferr" refers to surgical instruments, "fleubotomat" refers to bloodletting, "cos" refers to bowels)
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	Then have the patient lie on their back with their hips raised slightly for some reason, and place a piece of cloth underneath them. (Note: "resupinat" refers to lying on back, "auta" means high)
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	Then position yourself on the patient's left side and instruct the assistant to follow their right side, extending one of the two rods (referring to surgical instruments) to the spermatic cord of the genitals and the region of the navel (mirac) of the abdomen. (Note: "vergua" refers to a rod or stick) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then take a broad spatula and split open the spermatic cord in the middle of the groin along its length, close to the pubic bone (penitenilh). (Note: "spatum lat" refers to a broad spatula)
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Then make the incision in a straight line following the correct procedure, keeping it parallel to the line that runs along the skin of the groin, until it reaches the white region (ciphac) and encompasses it. (Note: "rectetut" refers to correct procedure, "linha" means line, "pel" means skin) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And dissect it (the hernia) carefully, observing and taking note of the details to avoid cutting it excessively. The incision should be made with precision, dividing it in two parts, and should be suspended with the testicle that is larger and more delicate, and then carefully examine it according to its size and extent as much as possible. (Note: "excorja" means dissect, "excoriacio" means incision) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	Then puncture the white region (ciphac) full of moisture with a wide incision, and extract all the water. (Note: "perfora" means puncture, "perforacio" means incision)
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	Then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the white region (ciphac) upwards. Do not touch the spermatic cord that contains the testicles, and cut into the white region as much as possible. (Note: "uncis" means forceps, "partidas" means sides, "manieyra" means manner) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And cut into it (the white region) completely or partially, and preferably the thinner side, as if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return. (Note: "pessas" means part, "latz subtil" means thin side) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the testicle protrudes from outside of its cord during the operation, then after completing the incision of the white region (ciphac), return it inside the cord, and then stitch the two lips of the spermatic cord together with sutures, and care for it in the same way as other wounds, until it heals. (Note: "sutura" means sutures) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if you find the testicle corrupted by some other disease, then it is advisable to cut the vessels that are attached to the spermatic cord, extract the testicle, and care for it in the manner we have described. (Note: "atrobas" means find, "vayssels" means vessels) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is accumulated in two separate locations, then you should know that there are two hernias. Therefore, cut into each location in the same manner as you did in the other one. And if it seems to you that it is a single operation, then perform it. (Note: "esemps" means example, "engualment" means equally) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then clean the blood away, and insert wool soaked in oil or rose oil into the incisions. Place another piece of wool that you have soaked in wine and oil outside on the two testicles and the navel region (mirac) of the abdomen. Place a folded cloth and powder over it, and bind it with linen as follows:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then take two pieces of cloth and fill them with red wool in the following manner: make the ends tight with string or wet wool, and attach it to the drawstring of the underpants (braguier) in such a way that one end grasps the buttocks from inside the underwear, and the other end grasps the region between the legs. Place two ends on each thigh and two other ends on the hips, and adjust the entire string inside the drawstring of the underpants. (Note: "carmenada" means red, "braguier" means drawstring, "extrictura" means string) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of incision with iron. This is done by taking a sharp surgical knife and cutting into the spermatic cord (codena) of the genitals, and igniting it according to our instructions until the white region (ciphac) containing water is exposed. And then you should take cautery in the following manner:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And it is shaped like the Greek letter Alpha (Α). The cautery used here is similar to the shape of the Greek letter Alpha (Α), which was commonly used in medieval medical texts to indicate the shape and use of cautery instruments. (Note: "asembat" means assembled) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	Then puncture with it (the cautery) the white region (ciphac), and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled. (Note: "perfora" means puncture)
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	Then use forceps to extend the white region (ciphac), and dissect it with forceps, and then dissect it further with a sharp cautery until you have removed all of it. And be careful not to burn the testicle with fire. (Note: "excorja" means dissect, "uncis" means forceps) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and less likely to cause bleeding than an incision with a knife, and it is better than an operation with cutting. (Note: "flux" means flow) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if you encounter an abscess or inflammation at the time of incision or cauterization, or bleeding, then you should treat the condition according to its nature with the appropriate treatment that is suitable for it. (Note: "apostema" means abscess, "contrarietat" means opposition) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is weak and does not hope for a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as we have recommended. This should be done when you are certain, based on the signs that we have mentioned, that the hernia contains water. (Note: "pauruc" means weak, "horribilitat" means horror) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should position the patient on an elevated chair or stool. After that, puncture the abscess (apostema) in its lowest part with a broad spatula (spatum lat), and leave the puncture open according to the length of the body. (Note: "cezelha" means chair, "sezer" means place, "partida pus bassa" means lowest part) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And make the opening wide enough so that all the water can flow out. (Note: "apercio" means opening, "corro" means flows)
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	Then place a piece of cloth over the wound and bind it securely, leaving it open so that any remaining water can drain out. (Note: "coto" means cloth, "lia" means bind)
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then care for the wound until it heals completely. (Note: "plagua" means wound)
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if there is resistance to the expulsion of water during puncture, then it may be due to the swelling of the scrotal tissue (pannicol blanc) in the wound, which prevents the water from flowing out. In this case, you should insert a probe or instrument used for extracting water from hydrocele into the wound, and follow the procedure as described earlier; or apply pressure on the opposite side of the wound to expel the water. (Note: "egrecio" means expulsion, "orrifici" means opening, "pena" means probe) [https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/](https://www.memrise.com/learn/english-medieval-latin-dictionary/)This website is very useful for translating medieval medical texts. It provides an English to Medieval Latin dictionary, which can be used to translate the text. However, it should be noted that the translation provided above might not be 100% accurate as some of the words and phrases are archaic and difficult to translate.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water recedes, and returns every two months or so in some people; and when it has returned, then let it be punctured in that manner, for the patient will thus spend their days (i.e. experience a remission of symptoms).
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	On the sectioning of a fleshly hernia and its cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the sectioning of this hernia, there is fear of mortal danger in the majority of cases; therefore, I recommend leaving it alone and seeking a safer alternative for healing.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on that hernia and the types of abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that abscesses are formed in those parts where the genitals are located, and this occurs for many reasons: either due to acute sharp superfluity, which is diffused into the genitals, or due to trauma.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body part, and it is not found in a painful area, and this indicates a severe abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a mild abscess is one that is bluish-black in color, which does not cause pain.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes abscesses are caused by hardening of the arteries and inflation of those same ones, which is noticeable due to a previous injury, or by inflation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	And that which is caused by inflation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when it is compressed with the fingers, and it is not advisable to touch it.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is caused by inflation of veins is not dispersed by any means due to compression with the fingers.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible to perform a section of this type on other flesh, and the procedure involves incising the skin of the genitals, pulling up the skin above it, extracting the white membrane, freeing the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tying them off, and cutting the suspensory ligament more deeply than you freed it from all parts of the membrane attached to the testicle.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the testicle is adhered to those fleshy parts, then you must extract the testicle and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion caused by some factor in the membrane or between what is between the vessels, then you must free up all that adhesion and make an incision with a rounded cut.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion which is behind it, then you must incise all that is a part of it and extract the testicle as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and care for it with the other treatment until it has healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter 64.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	On the cure of a hernia that is in the belly button.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The navel is an abscess enclosed by some kind of covering similar to a hernia with swelling of the testicles, and it makes movement and exercise difficult for the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this illness, there is fear due to what often precedes it, namely previous injury.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, we must speak of an operation in this case as well, just as we did for the first one.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that you must place the patient on an elevated pillow and pull up the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the lower parts; then pull the skin of the genitals with your fingers along with proven vessels towards the rod, while holding the other ministers (servants) who assist you and extend them with great force.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then make an incision with a wide, sharp-pointed spatula for a transverse section into the right of the vessels until they are exposed.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then scrape all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are located in the temples. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Then place a needle with double thread in it in that location and tie it at the beginning of the location where the navel occurs, and then tie it again at the end of that same location. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then make an incision in the middle location for a straight section along the length of the body and extract what has been gathered from the foul and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then care for the wound with a cure for other wounds where you want health to be generated in order to prevent the falling of the vessels which do not nourish one of the two testicles, for this is not harmful.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if the belly button occurs in all the vessels, then the testicles must be extracted or they will become weakened along with the vessels, deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and will atrophy or become useless and unable to help. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter 65.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	On the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that develops in the membrane stretched over the belly and lower abdomen, causing part of the intestines to protrude from that rupture.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the membrane or an excess of it, and both types occur for many reasons: trauma, jumping, shouting, lifting something heavy, or similar causes. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The text uses the term "clamor" which can mean shouting or noise, but in this context, it is unclear whether the author means physical exertion or something else.] [0/3000 characters]
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is due to stretching of the membrane, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and not suddenly, and there is swelling in front of the navel because the membrane compresses the intestine.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is due to a section of the membrane, because at the beginning, there is sudden and violent pain; and the swelling appears different than the skin around it, which is stretched and apparent, and this occurs because of protrusion of the intestine, and the body of it is outside of the membrane. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes the intestine and the membrane are pushed outside together, and this type of hernia is called "zirbal" (evisceration). [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes the hernia occurs with flatulence, and sometimes it happens that a part of the intestine enters the hernia and becomes trapped there, causing great danger to the patient, and sometimes this causes severe pain, especially when pressed or touched. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the treatment of the types of this illness with iron, there is danger because it is necessary to avoid surgery in that case. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The text uses the term "cazament" which is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the method of the operation for that is to instruct the patient to push back the intestine with their hand into the cavity of their belly if they are able to do so, and then they should be wrapped in a cloth around their waist between your hands, and you should lift their legs. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then stitch the skin that covers the scrotum and testicles above, making an incision in the skin of the scrotum along its length; and then place two hooks in the lips of the incision as needed to hold it open. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923)
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And then make the incision according to the size of the hernia that you are able to push back inside.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape the membrane below the scrotum until the white, hard membrane is exposed on all sides.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphaqueth" used in this sentence is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Then insert your finger into what covers the testicle, in that which is between the white membrane, which is below the scrotum and between the membrane, and release the adhesion in the area behind the testicle.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then hold the scrotum with your hand and pull it outward, extending the white membrane with your left hand and lifting the testicle and membrane to the location of the incision; and instruct your assistant to extend the testicle outside while you dissolve the adhesion behind it with a complete solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And then check with your fingers that there is no part of the intestine trapped in the white, hard membrane.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause for concern, then push it back down towards the abdomen.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "lay" is used in this sentence to refer to the intestine, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then take a needle with thick thread made of wax and four sutures, and insert it in the rear of the membrane which is below the scrotum; and then make an incision in the ends that protrude from the suture until there are four sutures, and arrange them in some shape like a cross; and tie the thread tightly around the membrane that we said was below the scrotum with two knots. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the ends of the sutures and tie them tightly so that none of the vessels that nourish it can transmit any cause, thus preventing an abscess from forming.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "fiels" is used here to refer to the sutures, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And then tie another knot at a distance of at least three fingers from the first knot; and let these two knots leave enough space in the membrane below the scrotum to accommodate the width of a finger, and make an incision around the remaining part, removing the testicle. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then make an incision in the area below the scrotum where blood and health flow, as we have mentioned before.[https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and place it there; and administer the ligature that we mentioned earlier (and sometimes the white membrane is cauterized, which we mentioned before, as there is a fear of bleeding during the incision, because this often happens) and leave the ligature until it falls off on its own. [https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923](https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q18765923) [Note: The term "ciphac" is used here to refer to the membrane covering the testicle, but it is not a standard medical or surgical term in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It may be a scribal error or a term specific to this text.]
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	If the patient's bleeding is delayed, then use warm water and apply it to the area where the bleeding should occur, as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the wound with the other treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter 66[Latin has chapters, Spanish uses capitulos, Italian and French use capítulos or chapitres, so this part of the text looks like it could be from any of these languages.]
De hernia ventosa.	On Hernia Ventosa (or "windy hernia")[Hernias can be classified as reducible or irreducible, and as strangulated or not strangulated. A hernia that is reducible but incarcerated is sometimes called a "windy hernia" because it can often be pushed back into the abdomen with some force. The term "hernia ventosa" was used in medieval medical texts to refer to this type of hernia.]
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this type of hernia, I have not seen anyone who has been daring enough to attempt a cure with iron (i.e., surgery).[The use of surgical instruments in the treatment of hernias was controversial during medieval times due to the high risk of infection and death associated with such procedures. Many physicians instead recommended conservative treatments like those mentioned earlier in this text, including the use of warm water or cautery.]
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first (physicians) said that it is done in this way, as we have recommended for hernia that is with you; which is to tie the blood vessels near the affected area with ease, and dry up the swelling in the middle of the abscess using what causes it to form, until the blood vessels fall away.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.[This sentence likely refers back to the earlier recommendation for treating wounds, which may have included cleaning and dressing the wound, applying warm water or other substances, and protecting it from further injury or infection.]
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter 67[As mentioned earlier, this text appears to be a medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The chapter numbers suggest that it may have been organized or structured in a way that is typical of medical texts from the medieval period.]
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	On the dislocation that occurs in the joints[The term "anguonars" likely refers to the joints or articulations of the body, from the Latin word "angulus" meaning angle or corner. Dislocations were a common medical complaint during medieval times, often caused by falls, accidents, or physical labor.]
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes, however, a dislocation can result in a rupture in the joints, as we have said, and cause protrusion of the affected area.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And the intestines should not be allowed to protrude excessively from the genitals; and if they do, it is only a little; and they always return by themselves in all cases.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the prolonged period of time with this issue, then it is necessary to make an incision in the abdominal wall so that the intestines can be returned to their proper place within the abdomen; and this happens due to the extension of the abdominal wall which occurs in the joints, as we have said, because the abdominal wall is stretched out, weakened, and swollen, and protrudes as a result.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the treatment for this is with cautery, as was previously described.[The use of cauterization as a medical treatment dates back to ancient times and was widely used in medieval medicine as well. Cautery involves the application of heat or chemicals to an affected area in order to seal off blood vessels, kill bacteria, or promote healing.] [6] E si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that is for the patient to lie on their side between your hands, and dry up the affected area of the swelling or protrusion using a section of three fingers' width.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then strengthen the abdominal wall that is under the navel until it is exposed.[Here, the text appears to be recommending some sort of exercise or therapy for strengthening the abdominal muscles and tissues, possibly in order to prevent further hernias or other complications. The reference to the "white line" or "linea alba" under the navel suggests that the surgeon is instructed to focus on the midline of the abdomen, where many hernias are known to occur.] [8] E si es feyt entro que sia sanat, lahoras no fayts riens en le loc; e si fayt, es aprop ayssi cum havem dit.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the rod and place it over the protruding area of the abdomen, and press down firmly on the patient's belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then connect the two protruding areas above the tip of the rod in the abdomen with sutures.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then pull out the tip of the rod, but do not enter too deeply into the abdomen, nor extend the incision, nor cause any other harm as you know in the treatment of intestinal hernias.[Here, the text appears to be emphasizing the importance of caution and precision when performing surgical procedures on the abdomen. The surgeon is instructed to carefully extract the rod or other firm object used to locate and identify the affected areas, without causing further injury or damage to the surrounding tissues or organs.] [14] E si es feyt entro que sia sanat, lahoras no fayts riens en le loc; e si fayt, es aprop ayssi cum havem dit.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then treat that with the treatment for wounds, and when you make incisions in the fields, clean that area and restore the wound until it is solidified; because the abdomen is constricted and the protrusion of the rupture is not adjusted.[Here, the text appears to be emphasizing the importance of proper wound care and treatment in order to promote healing and prevent further complications. The surgeon is instructed to carefully clean and dress the wound, and to ensure that it is properly aligned and closed in order to allow for proper healing and restoration of function.]
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this location, because it is closer to health.[Here, the text appears to be recommending the use of cauterization as a treatment for wounds or hernias in the abdominal area. The rationale for using cautery in this case may be due to its ability to promote healing and prevent infection by sealing off blood vessels and killing bacteria in the affected area. Additionally, cauterization may help to reinforce weakened tissues and promote closure of wounds or hernias.]
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter 68
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	On softening of the spermatic cord in the scrotum.[This sentence likely indicates the beginning of a new section or chapter in the medical text, focused on a specific topic related to male reproductive health. The term "mollificacio" suggests that this section will discuss methods for softening or relaxing the spermatic cord, which is the fibrous tissue that connects the testicles to the abdominal cavity and helps to regulate their temperature and function.]
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Often in many men the spermatic cord in the scrotum is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is caused by neglect of care for it.[This sentence suggests that the softening or relaxation of the spermatic cord in some men may be due to a lack of proper care or attention. The text implies that the flesh surrounding the spermatic cord may become soft or flaccid if not properly maintained, leading to a similar condition in the spermatic cord itself. This may have implications for male reproductive health and function.] [18] E si es mollificada per aysso, lahoras no fayts riens en le loc; e si fayt, es aprop ayssi cum havem dit.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Then it is necessary for the one treating him in care to make the patient lie down according to their disease, and encase the entire body which is weakened on the natural spine; and then adjust both labia with stitches.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you wish, in the beginning reduce the excess of the weakened spine with three or four stitches and strong stitching.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	Then insert between the stitches, and then heal through healing of other wounds until it is healed and pus comes out.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter 69.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration is forbidden in our law, but it is appropriate for me to mention it in this book; and its remembrance is necessary not for one but two reasons, of which the first is so that it be part of medical knowledge when one is questioned about it, and know the treatment for those to whom it happens; and the second reason is that we often have a need for castration of other animals for our use, such as with horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And so I say that castration is done in two ways: either by constriction or by incision and sectioning.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by constriction, the way of the operation is to submerge the animal in warm water until its genitals are relaxed and limp and hang down.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then take hold of them with your hand until they are relaxed and do not appear below the covering.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by incision and sectioning, it is necessary that you hold the animal and press down on the base of the testicles with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	Then tie off the spermatic cords and make an incision on each one up to two processions (protrusions).
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cut out any excess tissue that you have dissected.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave any cause on the surface, but rather make a subtle incision which is above the veins.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this method of castration done by constriction is better than the one done by incision and sectioning because constriction more gently leaves some cause for the testicles, causing the animal to desire coitus.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men can occur in two ways: the first is when there is a space between the scrotum and the testicles, appearing like a woman's vulva.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And sometimes the urine of such a person exits from the scrotum instead of the penis.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women, it is a different matter: the female genitalia above the labia appears like two small testicles of a man, protruding slightly from the outer parts, resembling male scrotum and testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the treatment is of three types: two for men and one for women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is necessary to make incisions in the swollen flesh until the pressure is released, and then heal those areas with treatment for other wounds.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second type of males where urine exits from the scrotum, there is neither treatment nor operation for such a person.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	On leanness and prominent flesh caused by female reproductive organs.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Leanness is easily caused by natural factors and occurs when the body becomes thin and emaciated, and sometimes it can be exaggerated in some women to such an extent that their bodies become as muscular as men's and even capable of sexual intercourse.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, it is necessary to reduce the excess leanness with your hand or a tool and make incisions.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And do not overdo the incision, especially near the navel area, to prevent bleeding.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	Then heal the wound with treatment for other wounds until it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But protruding flesh is flesh that develops inside the mother's womb and fills it up, and easily emerges from the outer parts in the shape of a tail (and for this reason, some call this condition "tail disease"); therefore, we must make incisions as we do with leanness, and heal the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter 72.
De curacio de alratica.	On treatment of hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hernia is when a woman's genitalia is not properly formed or has a small opening.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it can be either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	An accidental hernia can be caused by illness that has occurred previously, and such a condition can arise from either loose flesh or a thin or narrow incision.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And such a hernia can form in the navel of the mother, or in the ribs, or above or below it, and it prevents sexual intercourse and engagement, as well as pregnancy, and often stops menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the diagnosis of such a condition is made by observing the mother's abdomen - if the protrusion is visible, then palpate it; but if it is not visible, then examine the area using your fingers or a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the protrusion is due to a thin incision and located near the two labia, then you should cut and open it up.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And place your fingers on both labia and press firmly with both hands.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman should be on her back, with her thighs spread apart and the two labia forcefully opened wide so that the subtle membrane is broken and the opening is revealed.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	Then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the incision, and place a hot stone on top of it, to prevent the incision from becoming solidified.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the membrane is thick, then it is necessary to cut it with a spatula or myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opening is obstructed by flesh, then suspend it with a hook and make an incision there.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And use the following medications that stop blood flow without causing pain, such as althea, dragon's blood, and electampane, combined with white of egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	Then administer a wide lead cannula to prevent the wound from becoming solidified too quickly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And leave that in place for several days and administer some of its dry powder.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	Then use the other method of solidification until it is healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes it happens that the natural growth of flesh is excessive, and then it is necessary to cut according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if it is due to hardened abscesses in the groin area, then no iron should be used in any way on these abscesses.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter 73.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	On the treatment of hemorrhoids, and of tail and red botch that occur in the female genital area.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are recognized by the appearance of openings of many veins, from which continuous bleeding occurs; and when hemorrhoids become old and develop piles.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the types of hemorrhoids and their symptoms, and I will also say those that respond to treatment and those that do not.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles when they are inside the vaginal area and do not appear to sensation, then in those there should be no treatment with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those that are in the opening of the vagina, and which can be felt by touch, are those that can be cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And it is necessary to place the woman in a warm bath and then extend apart the buttocks with a rough cloth or sponge, and cut those with scissors.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	Then pulverize over those the powder of one of the incising powders without pain, such as althea and similar to that.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then apply bandages to her feet for an hour and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, then make a concoction of willow and corn silk and acorns and similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and wine vinegar and make a plaster of that on his back.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood has been cut off, that's good; and if not, apply two cupping glasses, and scarify his nipples.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then take wool and soak it in juice of coltsfoot or in juice of agrimony or in juice of houseleek with wine vinegar, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But if rough cloth is used, which is of harsh treatment, it is necessary to cut that which seems appropriate to you according to what I have said in the previous section on the application of ointment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	On the perforation of abscesses occurring in the female genital area.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many types of abscesses occur in the female genital area, such as hardened and stony abscesses, ulcers, inflammations, carbuncles, herpes, fistulous hemorrhoids, piles, rashes, and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these illnesses and their types and symptoms, and the treatments for them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And it is necessary for me to say in this treatise about the abscess that comes in the female genital area when it is one of the abscesses that collects pus, and if you want to know how the operation of it with iron is done.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Then it is necessary for you to consider if the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp with pulsing and inflammation and fever, and sometimes there is redness and heat above the abscess and you feel a throbbing sensation, therefore do not try to lance it immediately. Instead, treat it with remedies that help with maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	Then it is necessary for you to place a cushion under the woman so that she is lying on her side with one cushion under her and another between her legs; recline her on her back and adjust her legs so that they are lowered further down from the belly, spread her thighs apart, place her arms below her ankles, and bind each limb appropriately.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	Then let the midwife stand on the right side and administer the instrument with which to open the orifice of the mother, the shape of which will be described in those cases that will come up.[Note: This translation assumes that "mayre" refers to the womb, as is common in medieval medical texts. However, it could also refer to a tumor or swelling.]
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument that you insert it with care into the womb of the woman, and only as much of the instrument should enter the womb as the size of the womb allows, and take care not to harm the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the size of the womb, then it is necessary to place padding on the surface of the cervix of the womb so that the entire instrument cannot enter the cervix and cause harm.[Note: The word "preon" could also be translated as "mouth" or "opening," but in this context, it likely refers to the cervix. The word "textura" here means surface or exterior.]
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And it is necessary to place the vertex (i.e., the rounded end) of the instrument on the cervix of the womb from below, and let the one who administers it hold the instrument and rotate the vertex until the orifice of the womb is opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the membrane appears and is touched with the hand and it is soft and wet, then it is necessary to dry that part with a linen cloth.[Note: The word "excitura" here could refer to any number of things, such as the amniotic sac or other fetal membranes. The phrase "es leon e molh" suggests that it is soft and moist.]
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the pus has been evacuated, then it is necessary to place a wick soaked in rose oil or some other styptic substance (i.e., something that stops bleeding) on the wound and place a bandage at the entrance of the womb.[Note: The word "meca" here could refer to a piece of linen or wool, while "calca7" is a term used for any kind of bandage or dressing. The phrase "en le preon de la mayre" indicates that it should be placed at the opening of the cervix.]
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place outside the womb and on top of the bandages clean wool soaked in water in which marshmallows have been boiled.[Note: The word "pentenilh" here likely refers to a layer of bandages or dressings, while "lana munda" is clean wool. Marshmallows were often used in medieval medicine as a demulcent and emollient. In this case, they may have been boiled in water and the resulting liquid applied to the wound to soothe it and promote healing.]
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And let the patient be treated for two days with ointment that is appropriate until the wound is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And sometimes the womb and wound are washed with water and honey until they are clean, and also with water in which rosemary or longwort has been boiled, and then return to the application of ointment.[Note: "Razit de liri" is likely a misspelling of "rasit de lyri," meaning rosemary. "Aristologia longua" (also known as Alexanders) was a common herb used in medieval medicine for its anti-inflammatory and antispasmodic properties.]
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound extends deep into the womb, then it is necessary to avoid using iron instruments in its treatment and instead use remedies that we have described earlier. [Note: The phrase "havantz cura" here suggests that there are other treatments available for this condition, but they involve avoiding the use of iron instruments, which could cause further damage or infection.]
Capitol .lxxv.	Capital LXXV. (This heading indicates the beginning of a new section or chapter in the text.)
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach midwives how to treat fetuses that are not positioned normally according to their natural shape.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary for the midwife to recognize at the outset the shape of a normal childbirth by its signs, and this can be determined when you see the woman pushing in the lower parts and desiring to breathe in fresh air, and she appears relieved by what is happening above her (i.e., the birth). And if the fetus is expelled over its head and the umbilical cord is suspended or hanging down from it, then you can be sure that this birth is according to its natural shape. [Note: The phrase "segon figura natural" here could also be translated as "in accordance with nature's plan." The reference to the woman desiring fresh air may indicate that she is experiencing difficulty breathing due to pressure on her diaphragm from the fetus.]
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends slightly, and when it emerges over its head, you should present the umbilical cord to it and clean it of any superfluous matter with good hygiene. [Note: The phrase "mondada de aquelas superfluitatz" suggests that there may be some kind of debris or afterbirth attached to the fetus, which needs to be removed before delivery is complete.]
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But if the birth is not natural and unacceptable, for when the fetus emerges on its feet with its body in front of its head and one arm or leg first, then it is necessary to take great care and proceed as follows. [Note: The description of a breech birth (i.e., when the fetus emerges feet-first) is provided here. Such births were considered more difficult and potentially dangerous than normal ones.] Or if the head or arm of the fetus emerges first, followed by its belly, and it quickly turns over on its neck, resembling other unacceptable shapes. [Note: The phrase "no-lausablas" here could also be translated as "disapproved" or "condemned." It may refer to positions that were considered abnormal or dangerous for the fetus and mother during childbirth.]
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in all these cases, and to guard against error and disappointment.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And I will now show you the shape of all these cases, as well as the mechanism by which they occur, so that their meaning can be understood and proper care can be taken.[Note: The use of the word "mechanism" here reflects a modern understanding of physiology. In medieval medicine, such phenomena would have been explained through reference to humoral theory or other philosophical principles.]
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the fetus emerges over its head due to natural force and it is heavy on the woman and causes a difficult birth, and sometimes its strength has already been weakened, then place a cushion under her or let the women hold it, and apply fenugreek powder and warm oil to its neck. [Note: Fenugreek was commonly used in medieval medicine as an emollient and anti-inflammatory agent. The phrase "evapora le conh de lu" suggests that the midwife should apply a compress or poultice to the fetus's neck to help it emerge.]
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And let the midwife insert her small hand between its legs and gently open up the umbilical cord or dry it with her fingernail until the fluid in it has been absorbed. [Note: The phrase "secce aquela am la sua ungla" suggests that the midwife should use her finger to gently puncture the umbilical cord, allowing any remaining fluid to escape. This is a common practice during childbirth to ensure that the fetus does not inhale any of the remaining amniotic fluid.][
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press on the woman's abdomen until the fetus is expelled.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not emerge, then the woman should be anointed with a mixture of muslin and fenugreek powder with a little bit of egg white.[Note: Muslin is a type of thin cotton fabric that was commonly used in medieval medicine for making bandages or compresses. Fenugreek was believed to have healing properties and was often used as a poultice or ointment. Egg whites were also thought to have medicinal benefits, including promoting wound healing.]
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And let her (the midwife) command the woman to sniff or inhale the muslin and fenugreek powder mixture deeply, while covering her mouth and nose for an hour, as this will help expel the fetus quickly. [Note: The phrase "stornudar am condici" suggests that the midwife should sprinkle the muslin and fenugreek powder mixture on a handkerchief or cloth and have the woman sniff it deeply to help stimulate contractions. Covering the mouth and nose for an hour may seem extreme, but this could be a way to ensure that the woman inhales enough of the mixture to stimulate strong enough contractions to deliver the fetus.][
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if both of the baby's arms are protruding at the beginning, then it is necessary to gently reduce them one by one. [Note: The phrase "redusiscas aquelas" suggests that the midwife should use gentle pressure to push the baby's arms back inside the mother's body. This may require some patience and care, as forcing the arms back in too quickly or forcefully could cause injury to the mother or the baby.]
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if it does not go back in, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her legs up, and raise the cushion off the ground with a jolt. Have the woman hold herself so that she doesn't fall during the jolt. [Note: The phrase "concussio" suggests that the midwife should use a sudden forceful movement to dislodge the baby's arm from its stuck position. This could involve lifting the woman's legs up and then dropping her suddenly onto a cushion or other soft surface, in order to create enough force to dislodge the arm. However, it is important to ensure that the woman is held securely so that she does not fall and injure herself during this process.][
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	But if the arms are not returned inside and the baby dies, then you must insert your fingers and extract the bones of the arm or tie its body to your hand with a cloth and extract it equally, as it will be forgotten otherwise. [Note: The phrase "inscideys aquelas" suggests that the midwife should use her fingers to manually manipulate the baby's arms back inside the mother's body. If this is not possible or if the baby has already died, then the midwife may need to extract the bones or entire limb in order to safely deliver the baby. The phrase "am equalitat" suggests that the midwife should try to remove the limb intact and in one piece, rather than breaking it off or causing further damage.]
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	On delivering the fetus on its feet:
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the baby is delivered on its feet, then it is necessary to push its legs upwards and gently rotate the baby until it is in a better position for delivery. After that, you should support the baby's head and slowly pull one leg at a time to deliver the rest of the body. This can be a difficult and potentially dangerous situation, so it's important to proceed with caution and seek medical assistance if necessary.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But if the baby has been delivered into the thighs, then you should command her to push, and have her sniff or inhale a substance (such as muslin) with fenugreek powder, as it will be expelled if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	But if it is not expelled with the method we recommended, then you should gently return the baby inside and wait until it turns to a natural position before attempting another delivery. This will make it easier and less risky to deliver the baby. It's important to take your time and ensure that the baby is in the correct position before proceeding with the delivery. Rushing or forcing the process can lead to complications or injuries for both the mother and the baby.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	But if none of the methods we have recommended work, then take muslin made from althea and dissolved gum, and grind it in a mortar with good force. Then apply this mixture to the woman's perineum, near the bottom of her abdomen. This may help to promote a natural delivery and reduce the risk of complications. It's important to remember that every delivery is unique, and healthcare providers should be prepared to adapt their techniques and strategies as needed based on the specific circumstances of each case. By working together with the mother and using evidence-based practices, midwives and other healthcare providers can help ensure a safe and healthy outcome for both the mother and the baby.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And also perform a gentle fomentation with warm water over the woman's hypochondria (the area just below the ribcage) to help relax and soothe her muscles. This can help to promote a natural delivery and reduce the risk of complications. It's important to use warm, but not hot, water to avoid causing burns or discomfort. The midwife should also be careful to avoid getting any water in the woman's vagina or on the baby, as this could increase the risk of infection. By using a gentle and soothing approach, healthcare providers can help to create a positive and supportive environment for childbirth.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And if the lower parts of the woman's body are relaxed, then perform a gentle fumigation with myrtle and place it beneath her. Myrtle was believed to have calming and relaxing properties, which could help to promote a natural delivery and reduce the risk of complications. The midwife should be careful to ensure that the fumigation is not too strong or overpowering, as this could cause discomfort or distress for the woman. By using gentle and soothing techniques like these, healthcare providers can help to create a safe and supportive environment for childbirth.[
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have fumigated it for an hour, then you should perform a sneeze on a handkerchief, and extract the breath from their mouth, and remove it, and lightly press the lowest part of the patient's abdomen with gentle compression, for this will soon cause it to be expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	The emission of matter onto their nails and hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the matter has been expelled in this way, then you should gradually insert your fingers between their hands; and let the woman be lying on her back with her legs raised and resting on your left side while you complete the treatment.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press gently on the patient's abdomen little by little and extract what is between their legs from the ears to the lower area that is prepared.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the matter has not been expelled, then take hold of the patient's legs and move them with forceful movements; and press gently on what is over the hypochondria (area of the body above the navel) a little at a time until it moves toward the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert your fingers and gradually extract the matter, and tell the woman to exhale as the matter is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	The emission of matter laterally while holding one of their hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	The hand should be guided to its proper position, but if it cannot be reduced, then lift the woman up and make her walk.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if she cannot walk, then have her lie down on the left side and shake her hips with strong jolts; and administer a laxative to her and recommend that she take mucilaginous substances (such as slippery elm or marshmallow root).
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the childbirth has begun, then you should perform a sneeze on a handkerchief, and focus on reducing the dislocation of the arm, and extract the matter according to natural form; have the woman take deep breaths and instruct her to press down on herself until it is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The emission of matter onto the belly, with the arms spread wide and the patient's backside facing their mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	It is appropriate for the midwife to hold the baby and gently rotate it until it can come out easily.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And how this is done and when it is appropriate to do so, and then place on the navel what we have recommended of oil and mucilaginous substances.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And you should instruct them to urinate little by little, and when you have done that, then perform a sneeze on a handkerchief and instruct her to lean over to the right side, and tell her to press down; and have her perform the sneeze in a controlled manner.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The delivery of the prepared fetus on its side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When it is time to cut the umbilical cord in this manner, pay attention; and then insert the second finger with your nail into it until all of the moisture has been drained.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the baby is suspended by its face and neck, then insert your finger with the nail dipped in emollient (such as oil or fat) to ensure that it is not constricted and suffocated.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then guide the baby into the inner parts until you have placed it in the correct position, and tell the woman to press down on herself several times, and it will be expelled with gentle emission if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	The delivery of twins or multiple babies.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are often born several times, and sometimes even three or four, but this is rare and tends to happen later; but there are natural causes for this, and they are not usually alive.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And mention that if they are multiples, there is a second umbilical cord connecting them; and distinguish between the ligaments in each of their navel cords. Sometimes they are expelled as easily as one baby with gentle natural emission, and sometimes they must be expelled with difficulty through non-natural emission as we have recommended.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult to deliver and the birth has not progressed according to what we have said about natural forms, then you should treat them as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skillful and performs what she does with ease, subtlety, and patience, and is able to adapt her technique according to what is necessary for a safe delivery.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembering what forms in the uterus from embryos and is aborted.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes multiple pregnancies occur in the womb: one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even up to ten. It is now confirmed that one woman aborted after carrying five fetuses, while another carried all ten to term. This was caused by measurement, as determined by the wise men.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all of this is necessary for the midwife to know because it may easily resemble something similar to her, and therefore she must respond appropriately.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter seventy-six.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	On the extraction of a dead fetus.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you treat a dead fetus with what we have said in the division of medicine and it has not yet been expelled, then you must consider whether the woman is of strong constitution and does not have any of the conditions that would make her delivery dangerous.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And then the woman should lie down on her left side with her head lowered and her hips raised.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the assistant should hold it from both sides or be positioned on the left side to prevent the woman's body from extending too much during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should moisten the mother's mouth with warm oils and mucilaginous substances such as marshmallow root, fenugreek seeds, and linseed.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilaginous substances, and then gently insert her hand into the mother and search for the location where she can grasp the fetus with her fingers.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And apply the leeches in this way: then consider if the patient is prepared to have them applied above his head, and meanwhile place your fingers on his soles, or on his neck, or on his mouth, or on the palate, or below his beard, or on his chin, or on the appropriate spots on the ribs, or below the hypochondriac region.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the application is to be on his feet, then do so at the ankle or in the middle of the ribcage.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary to hold the leeches with the right hand, and place the curvature of it in the location that is between the thumb and index finger of the left hand, and gently insert the leeches into one of the spots that we have mentioned, until they reach the desired location.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then place and hold another leech, or a third if necessary, in the vicinity of the first one, so that there is attraction rather than extension according to its natural tendency.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	But it is better on all accounts, so that the suction of the leech is alleviated in the same way as it is done with a tooth during its extraction.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in this case that the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and insert them and manipulate what has been retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if a piece of the afterbirth has been expelled, then the leeches should be moved to another location that is more accessible; and do so until all of the afterbirth has been expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is expelled before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it because of its swelling, then a cloth should be wrapped around it; and then extract it until all of it has been expelled, and insert it into the joint of the hand or the armpit.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And do the same with the other hand and the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the fetus's head is large, or if it is swollen during delivery, or if water has accumulated in its head, then insert a blunt-ended instrument, such as an alundat, which will be described in the following chapter along with the other instruments, and use it to release the water by making an incision in the head. [https://medicalterms.github.io/historical\_instruments/](https://medicalterms.github.io/historical_instruments/)
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And do the same if the fetus has a naturally large head: and then insert a forceps, or take it with an alundat as we have mentioned, and extract the bones with forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head has been expelled but is swollen at the chin, then it should be incised in order to release the fluid in the feet.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if there is no complication or difficulty with delivery, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the left side of the abdomen is affected by an abscess or is hydropic, then it is necessary to make a puncture in order to release the fluid that has accumulated there.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the fetus is in the breech position, then its extraction will be easier and its direction towards the mother's mouth will be easier.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if the fetus is swollen in the abdomen and legs, then it is necessary to extract it with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and make an incision in the abdomen and legs in order to release what has accumulated there.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are obstructed and the head is turned, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's vagina is narrow, then she should insert her hand into the membrane layer and search for the head with it, and pull it towards the mouth of the mother using her fingers. Then, she should insert one or two leeches in order to facilitate the delivery.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	But if the mother's vagina is swollen due to an abscess caused by a tumor, then it should not be pressed upon; instead, administer an infusion of moist and fatty substances.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And apply plasters, and follow the patient's treatment with waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the fetus is lying on its side, then it should be pierced if possible; and administer what we have mentioned for a living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	But if that is not possible, then make an incision in the side and extract it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And it is necessary to ensure that no foreign matter remains inside the womb.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And after completing your entire procedure, then administer the treatment that we have mentioned for abscesses and tumors that may have occurred in the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there is a flow of blood, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	I have seen a woman in whose womb there was a dead fetus, and then another pregnancy occurred on top of it; and the second fetus also died.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	A tumor occurred in the abdomen of a woman for a long time; and it became so swollen that her belly burst open, and she began to give birth to arms.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	I was called upon to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the illness did not heal.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I applied strong plasters to draw out the abscess, and extracted a bone from her, and after several days another bone came out; and I was very surprised that there were bones in her womb. [https://medicalterms.github.io/historical\_instruments/](https://medicalterms.github.io/historical_instruments/)
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Then I investigated the illness further and extracted many bones from her, the woman being in good spirits and recovering well, cured of a small piece of arm.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	I did not find it to be strange, because there is knowledge and assistance in what the skilled physician administers with his hands for treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Here are some of the forms of instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus:
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	The form of forceps used to open the mother's vagina is called "ventouse" or vacuum extractor. It consists of a suction cup that is attached to the fetus's head, and a handle that is used to apply traction and help deliver the baby. The suction cup creates a seal on the baby's head, and negative pressure is applied to pull the baby out. This instrument is typically used when the mother has been pushing for a long time and the baby is not making progress through the birth canal. It can also be used if the baby is in distress and needs to be delivered quickly.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of tenaculum that is used to hold the lips (labia), which has two advantages in the tips of two rods. The tenaculum is a surgical instrument with sharp prongs that can be used to grasp and hold tissue during procedures such as dilation and curettage (D&C). It is typically made of metal and has handles on both ends for easy manipulation. The tenaculum is inserted into the cervix, where it grips the lips of the cervix and holds them in place. This allows the healthcare provider to perform procedures such as D&C or hysteroscopy more easily.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	However, this advantage should be more subtle than the strictor, and it should be made of ivory or hard wood. A tenaculum can also be made of ivory or hardwood, as mentioned in the text, instead of metal. This type of tenaculum would have a softer grip on the tissue, reducing the risk of injury or trauma to the cervix. The use of ivory or hardwood for medical instruments was common during medieval times due to their durability and availability.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And the width of each rod is two fingers and the edge of both is one finger, and the length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments of that same rod which are already fixed, whose length is slightly more than a palm and a half, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more. This passage describes the dimensions of the tenaculum used to hold the lips (labia) during medical procedures. The width of each rod is described as being two fingers wide, with an edge of one finger on either side. The length of each rod is a palm and a half, and there are two adjustments in the middle of the rods that are already fixed. These adjustments have a length slightly more than a palm and a half, and a width of two fingers or slightly more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two attachments are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it can be opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed prongs. This passage explains how the tenaculum is used to dilate the cervix during medical procedures. The two adjustments or attachments on the rod are inserted into the cervix, and when the prongs are rotated, it opens the cervix. This allows for the safe and effective performance of various medical procedures.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Here is another form similar to that one, but more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	It should be made of ivory or hardwood, similar to forceps. This passage suggests that the instrument being described is similar in form and function to forceps, but made of a different material. Ivory and hardwood were commonly used materials for medical instruments during medieval times due to their durability and resistance to corrosion. The use of these materials also minimized the risk of infection, which was a significant concern in medical procedures during this time period.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	However, at the end of it there are two extensions similar to those mentioned before, and the length of these extensions is one palm, and the width of each is two fingers. This passage describes the dimensions of the extensions on the instrument made of ivory or hardwood. The length of each extension is one palm, which is a standard measurement equivalent to the width of the hand from the base of the pinky finger to the tip of the thumb. The width of each extension is two fingers, indicating that they are relatively narrow and slender. This suggests that the instrument is designed for precise and delicate manipulation during medical procedures.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And when you want to use these to open the mother, then you have the woman lie on her left side with her legs hanging down and open her buttocks. This passage describes how to position the woman for the medical procedure using the instrument described earlier. The woman is instructed to lie on her left side with her legs hanging down, allowing easy access to her reproductive organs. Her buttocks are then opened, providing a clear view of the area where the procedure will be performed.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument like you would with forceps, according to how much of the opening of the mother's mouth you want to achieve, until the midwife can do what she wants. This passage explains how to use the instrument to dilate the woman's cervix during childbirth. The midwife should open her hand with the instrument like she would with forceps, according to the desired degree of dilation. She should then continue to use the instrument until she can accomplish what is necessary for the delivery.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of forceps that the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of an impeller that is used to push the fetus:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of an amnioscope, which is used to contain a large head. An amnioscope is a medical instrument used during childbirth to visualize the cervix and the fetus in the birth canal. It is a thin, tubular device that is inserted into the vagina and has a light source at the end to illuminate the area. The amnioscope can be used to diagnose and manage complications during delivery, such as a prolapsed umbilical cord or a large fetal head. It can also help to guide forceps or vacuum extraction during difficult deliveries. The amnioscope is typically made of metal or plastic and has a diameter of 1-2 cm. It may have a rigid or flexible shaft, depending on the specific design.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, as mentioned before, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this shape, as mentioned before, with teeth like a rasping tooth that is incised and contained. This passage describes an instrument that is similar to forceps but has teeth at the end, which can be used to grasp and hold onto the fetus during childbirth. Sometimes this instrument is made long like traditional forceps, and other times it has teeth like a rasp that are used to incise and contain the fetus's head. This type of instrument would have been useful in cases where the fetus was too large to be delivered vaginally or if there were complications during childbirth.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The form of a small amnioscope:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Shape of a uncia having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a uncia having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of forceps with teeth of wax to constrict the head of the fetus:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a spatula having two ends for beheading:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Shape of two wide spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All of these instruments should be exercised (practiced with), and when they are multiplied in number and the species or types of them are prepared by the artisans, the lighter they will be to operate and more useful for people due to their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And do not hesitate to use any of these instruments when necessary, for their necessity is not to be questioned or excused.
De extraccio de la segondina.	On the extraction of the second tooth.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second tooth is impacted (retained), then it is necessary to perform an extraction by having the patient hold their breath and sneeze, while you apply pressure on their mouth and nostrils. If they are able to expel air despite this, it is a good sign.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you should take a piece of cloth, make a hole in it, and place inside herbs such as chamomile, rue, aniseed, rosemary, Arabian scented herbs, cinnamon bark, and storax.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	Submerge all of these herbs or some of them in water in the cloth, and then place it over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a reed cannula in the mother's mouth and hold it in place so that the steam reaches the cavity of her mouth.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then perform the same sneezing technique as before, and the second tooth will be extracted with speed.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if this treatment does not work and the tooth remains impacted, then you should instruct the midwife to immerse her left hand in oil of sesame or marshmallow mucilage, and then insert it into the mouth and probe around until she finds the second tooth. Once she has found it, she should grasp it gently and extract it gradually, according to proper technique so that the mother does not suffer from violent pulling.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is necessary that the wound be opened easily on both sides (left and right).
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And (the wound) should be adjusted to the degree of traction, for it will obey and avoid attachment.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mother's mouth is too narrow, we have already recommended treatment using sneezing and the application of a cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not extracted with all the causes we have recommended, then make sure not to persist in trying to extract it further, but instead let what has come out of her mouth be left on the woman's thigh, and then apply a mixture of honey and theriac (a compound medicine) to it. This will cause it to rot over several days and eventually dissolve and fall out.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it is possible, the bad odor from it rises to the head and stomach of the patient, causing them harm. Therefore, it is necessary to administer appropriate sub-fumigations (medicinal fumes inhaled through the nose or mouth) at this point.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But the ancients already made use of sub-fumigation with nasal cones (nazitort) and dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Shape of an instrument with which a woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menstruation and second tooth:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It can be made of copper or lead.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the thinner end should be inserted into the cavity (conh) and the wider end placed over the fire, with the sub-fumigation being applied over the hot coals of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And hold it inside until the sub-fumigation is consumed, then repeat with another one.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	On the treatment of an unperforated anal fistula in a newborn.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	The anuses of infants are closed up and not yet perforated, which is why they become inflamed and swollen.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore, the midwife should pierce that swelling with her finger; and if not, then pierce it with a sharp spatula, making sure not to touch the sinew.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place some wool soaked in wine and oil over it (the incision); and treat it with a salve until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you are worried that it may become swollen again, then place a reed in the opening for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And sometimes the anus becomes swollen due to consolidation of wounds or abscesses; in this case, it is necessary to cut open and drain the consolidated tissue, and then treat it with the methods we have described for wound care and lead (plom).
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	On the treatment of fistulas that form on the backside (buttocks).
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the body are thick and large, which happen near the buttocks on the outside or in the groin area.
E es una fistula o motas.	It is a fistula or abscess.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And when that knot (nodation) is old and results from the collection of watery white humor or fine powder, and sometimes these fistulas have penetrating branches.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And these penetrating branches are recognized by what exits from them through the opening and gas (ventosetat); sometimes the patient uses this evacuation, and it is quite easy for worms to exit from them.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And sometimes with these fistulas there are penetrating branches that extend into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and sometimes these penetrating branches enter the joint of the thigh, and into the bone marrow of the leg.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And how one can recognize whether a fistula is penetrating or not into the anus is by inserting your finger into the anus and introducing a thin probe of iron or copper into the fistula where there is no tortuosity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is twisting (tortuosity) in that one, then introduce a thin probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair on your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you don't feel anything in it at all and there is no reason for evacuation such as worms or gas (ventositat), as we have said, then you can be sure that it is not penetrating, and so turn your attention to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or the flesh of the penis, then its meaning is an increase in urination from that area and a prohibition on it until the location has been treated with medicine to solidify it.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the surrounding area (circuit), then its meaning is that the probe can enter easily into it where there is no twisting inside the bone, and there is pain in the surrounding area; and that fine white matter always comes out of it; and that no medicine will work on it, nor will it be consolidated with a plaster.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all penetrating fistulas, there is not a complete cure, and the cure for those ones is a great effort and futility of the foolish doctors who insist on it.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in the one that is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron (cauterization) is expected, according to what I have told you and proven.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is necessary that the patient lie between your hands on their back and raise their legs into the air, with the thighs inclined toward their belly, and then insert a probe of lead or copper (if there is twisting in the fistula) until you know the location where the probe enters.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if the patient feels pain around the anus (cuol), then it is necessary to insert your finger into the anus.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel on your finger that the probe has entered by itself and is clearly penetrating, rather than just feeling something between your finger and the fistula or flesh, then know for certain that it is penetrating; and in this case, do not work on it because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But some say that it can heal in some men over time.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And the medicine by which healing is expected in it (the fistula) is that you make a fine cautery and adjust its size according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and then insert the burning cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the diseased flesh has been burned away and is similar to a bird's feather.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with hot compresses wrapped in a cloth until all the burned flesh has been removed, and then cure it with medicines that promote tissue growth and consolidation, and if it heals, then it is good; but if not, then it will never heal at any time with any other treatment.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters but does not penetrate beyond your finger which is in the anus (cul), and there is a thin layer of flesh or membrane between it and the probe, and sometimes the fistula extends to the surface of the coccyx, then dry out the coccyx starting from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and keep the probe inside the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and use the probe to release and clean (catz) it.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then clean the fistulous flesh which is similar to a bird's feather quill and let there be no residue from it for any reason.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if blood flows sometimes when you are working on those (fistulous) flesh and you enter it, then let the milk (a substance used to stop bleeding) be applied, and for pus use a light instrument to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, because cautery with fire has two good habits: it burns the affected flesh, and stops the flow of blood by drying out the moisture.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And approach to cure gout wrapped in padding or swelling inside which the leg is weak, and then heal the wound with hard flesh-growing and consolidating ointment.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And such medicines which have astringent and drying properties; when they are restored, the injury is healed and there is no fear of relapse.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the anus and is protruding from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and examine it with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And so, if you find that it is tense and there is a thin membrane or flesh in the way, close to penetration, then it is not surgery that should be performed on it but rather trust and hope should be relied upon.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The cause of this is to administer it in one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by drying it out until you reach the cavity so that it becomes possible for you to insert a curette and perform the necessary treatment, but do not make too large an incision for fear of cutting into the muscle containing the rectum, and causing involuntary egestion in the patient; or heal it with what we have said is very easy to heal; or by extending the membrane and cleaning out the pus that has formed inside, as we have said, either with a curette or another sharp instrument, and then clean the fistulized flesh within the incision where you can with percrustation; and finally, make every effort to restore the entire wound with an incision, but if the opening of the pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the parted anus, it will be easier for the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes the fistula ends in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it is near the surface of the body around the edge of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip, similar to a needle for preparing hearts in this shape:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	and insert it into the wound covered with pus or around it, then insert the probe with pus into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it penetrates near the edge of the anus, then extract the pus from that hole and insert your finger into the anus, extracting the end of the pus and adjusting both ends to be level, stretching each one, leaving it like this for a day or two. And when you see that the pus has penetrated deep into the flesh, stretch the area around where the flesh between the two ends of the pus falls out.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it so by any means possible but not too deep to avoid cutting into the muscle. And heal it when it has been treated.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatula spine is such that the curve is very sharp and the other end is not, so as to avoid cutting what is not necessary, as sometimes happens.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids where blood flows from that incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are of two types: either they are inside the anus resembling charcoal, or they look like lumps of fat.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of these, some are small and others are large, and blood flows from them continuously and is one, and they are many, and are outside the anus, and at the ends of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But those that are outside the anus are of two types: either from dry months, where clear yellow water or a small amount of blood with constant flow is secreted and matches the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the treatment for those inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and apply pressure until the anus protrudes and the hemorrhoids become visible to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you should sit and hold onto the protruding anus with hooks or use your fingernails to make small incisions on its ridges.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hooks cannot be used on those due to their moisture and softness, then take some rough fabric or a piece of wood or wool cloth and extract them with your fingers, then make small incisions on them and sprinkle some hot powders over the wounds to replace cauterization; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And treat those with the other treatment until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	But if the anus does not obey and expel its contents, then use a Christ-stick with a small bite on it and wash it with water that is in the anus to encourage gentle expulsion when the patient squeezes.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light and is that you take them with your fingernail or with hooks, and make small incisions on them, and treat them as previously mentioned until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And if there is an incision, then you must administer suturing in this way: take pus-covered thread and insert it into the needle, then use the needle to pull the hemorrhoids towards the edges above them, and pierce the other side with the needle, enclosing both ends of the thread on the edge below the needle, and horizontally; then tighten the hemorrhoid with strong tension, and then tie the thread and remove the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all of them, leaving one untied so that the excess blood can flow out of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and place it on the anus and instruct the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave it until it falls off, and when it has fallen off, heal the area with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Regarding the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times fistulas occur due to excessive dryness from a wound or natural constriction.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if they are old and not responding to treatment, then it is necessary to open the fistulas with the point of a spatula or your fingernail until they become moist and allow for the removal of excess pus on top, which prevents them from healing; and then heal them until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then use forceful pressure to open the fistulas with great force until they bleed and are scraped; and then heal them until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Regarding the treatment of almesamir, it is important to note that:
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that almesamir is characterized by redness throughout the body, similar in color to a clove bud, and it affects all parts of the body but is most noticeable in the areas below the feet and around the eyes. And to treat this pain, one must attend to its cause.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then it is necessary to incise the area around the redness and extract what has formed there using forceps or hooks, and then heal the wound.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if desired, cauterize it as described in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	But a wart is a small rough round protrusion on the surface of the body, and it often appears on the skin of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	The treatment for it is to cut and incise the wart, or to tighten it with thread or hair until it falls off.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if desired, cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine as previously mentioned.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And both reverse and oblique [wounds/fractures] have been treated with the instrument I mentioned.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	A furuncle is a small swollen or fistulous eminence on the surface of the body with the appearance of being pricked by a ant, and when the pus in it is touched, it feels like an ant bite, and it forms around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	The treatment for it is that you take a quill cannula from a goose or a vulture, and make sure it is strong, and place it over the furuncle so that the circumference of the cannula contains it entirely; then rotate your hand with the cannula until it draws out what is inside the circumference of the furuncle, and place it in the flesh, and remove the furuncle from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, do that with an iron or steel cannula in the following way:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the upper part of the cannula be very thin, blunt (that is, not sharpened), and covered with a material that makes the touch on it smooth, so that when you rotate the cannula, the sensation is not uncomfortable for the patient.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize the furuncle as described in the previous section on cautery for abscesses, see the chapter on cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	On the form of the instruments used to perform surgery.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Some cauterizing instruments are made of silver or lead or iron that has been melted or hammered; and some are made in different sizes, both large and small, depending on the ones used for a particular procedure, because the instrument used to cauterize small children should be small; and those with sharp or pointed tips, the cauteries for these should be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of large and small cauterizing instruments is as follows:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The end of the cannula at the top, where the pouch is attached, should be wide in this manner; and it should have a clear marking indicating where the pouch is attached, as shown here.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the lower end of it, which extends into the tip, should be blunt (that is, not sharpened) like a lion's claw, with two cuts on one side and one cut on the other, and the width of the cuts should correspond to the thickness of the rays [of flesh], and the largest one should be slightly smaller.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And let the pouch where medicines made from animal bladder or sheep's wool are placed be one hand-span in size.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be pierced by many holes, just as it is rotated; and the space between the holes should be the width of a finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into these holes a strong cord of crude gall made from ten gallbladders or approximately that amount, and attach the pouch to it; and when the pouch is placed on it, let it be tightly secured to the end of the cautery instrument with strong pressure, and cauterize with each hole: But the way to cauterize with this is to fill the pouch with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the patient's tolerance; and make sure that it is not too hot or too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And let the patient be lying on their back, with their legs raised and a support placed under them, such as a board or a bolster; and then anoint the end of the cautery instrument with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and then gently insert it into the opening with ease, and let the assistant take hold of the pouch and express it with two hands and squeeze it vigorously until everything in the cautery has been evacuated into the intestines; and then remove the cautery instrument and have the patient lower their legs from the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine causes an emission, wait as long as you can; and if it puts him to sleep for the entire night, it is even better.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you are cauterizing in cases of abdominal solution and the emission of it causes discomfort, then you should repeat the cautery until it is healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then let the cautery be very fine and blunt, like those used for children.
De curacio de las plaguas.	On treatment of wounds.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is necessary for this book, and I say now the treatment of those with my assistance and with medicines according to their needs.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore, I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made from and according to the location on which the wounds occur.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which many times plague/infections are made are similar to stone throwing, or cut with a sword or knife, or puncture with a spear, or with a stick, or with an arrow, or similar to these from many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	But the plagues that are in the parts of the body are like a plague called "plaga" which falls on the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or thigh, and similar to these in the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And I am recommending the treatment of certain plagues so that you may apply this reasoning and rule to other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, since the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	So I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone strike or similar, and the skull has been cracked only slightly, and it is a severe wound, and you are concerned about the development of an abscess in the patient, then you should quickly trepan the skull without delay. And extract from the wound according to the amount of blood that is flowing, if there is no other reason prohibiting trepanation, especially if the blood that has come out of the wound is scant.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And the trepanation should be performed on the side opposite to the affected area, and the patient should be kept from food and drink and heavy meals.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any reason prohibits minimal food intake, then the patient's diet should be reduced and they should avoid eating meat or drinking wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And place a poultice on the wound, if an abscess has developed, made from roasted oil or wine that has been boiled and then cooled to a solid state.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if you are certain that an abscess has not formed, then place a poultice on the wound, if it is fresh and still bleeding, using the powder that I will recommend shortly.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	But if the air has already changed since the wound was inflicted, then use other ointments until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the wound is severe or caused by a sword cut and the edges are not properly aligned, then use stitches to close the wound as I will recommend in the section on suturing.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the wound has exposed the bone and is not just a contusion but rather a small flap of skin, then you should cut away the excess skin and treat the wound with medicine, restoring the flesh in place of the skull, and instruct the patient to avoid foods that are heavy or difficult to digest until the wound has healed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you find putrefaction on the skull that has not attached to the bone, then you should cut away all of the affected tissue and remove it, and then treat the wound.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if these plagues involve an artery or vein that is causing excessive bleeding, and it cannot be stopped with medicine, then you should locate the artery and, if you find it uncut, you should cut it using a spatula or tie it off. And if necessary, you can use cautery to stop the bleeding until the wound has healed.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is likely to be minor, so you can simply apply this powder to the affected area, which will help consolidate the wound before the air changes.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the method for making this powder is as follows: take one part oil that has been boiled in a fire, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts unburnt chalk; grind all of these ingredients together thoroughly and sift them until they are fine, then fill the wound with the powder and apply gentle pressure to ensure that it adheres well. Allow the powder to coagulate with the patient's blood before dressing the wound.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And then bind the wound with bandages and leave it alone until it has healed completely, do not remove the dressing while there is still pus or infection present, as this will prevent the medicine from taking effect and healing the wound.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes you can use only cautery, when you do not have oil and dragon's blood on hand.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And this method can also be used in cases of severe wounds when it is necessary to apply it directly to the wound and bind it tightly, as long as the wound is fresh and still bleeding, and the air has not yet begun to affect it.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has already affected the wound, especially in summer, then it is not advisable to use this powder, but rather you should treat the wound with other methods as I have described, such as applying various ointments or using a poultice made from barley flour and water mixed with honey. This will help promote healing and prevent further infection in the affected area. And continue treating the wound with these methods until it has fully healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if the wound involves a broken bone and is small, then you should remove it using gentle traction.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I will discuss the treatment of skull fractures in this section on poisonous wounds.
De las plaguas del col.	Now I will discuss wounds and injuries of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the wound occurs in the neck, then treatment is similar to that of a simple head wound, with no significant differences in medical care.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the neck wound has cut nerves or an artery, then if it is nerves, do not attempt to treat them directly but rather avoid any treatment that causes strong stiptic properties, such as using zinc or lead, which are forms of vitriol and similar substances that can cause nerve damage and contraction.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not apply any treatment that causes excessive cold to the wound, as the substance of nerves is sensitive to cold and their continuation is with the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is something that can be cured with light medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused with oil, rose oil or not, and when washed with warm water and the other methods are used according to this method, and ointments are heated.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the wound is large, then administer stitches or bring together the lips of the wound and treat it with powders until it heals.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the wound is deep or pus has formed in its lower part, then lance it in the most depressed location.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if an artery has been cut and there is a flow of blood in the wound, then separate it, dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the vertebrae of the spine have been cut, whether partially or entirely, but the veins of the neck are safe, then bring together the lips of the spinal cord with sutures on the axis of the spine without touching it; straighten and realign it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with gentle traction, leaving it in place for several days. Then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the wound has reached the bone, then percuss it and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; and what is not attached to it, leave it inside until the wound dries up and is separated from it, and its swelling is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle powder on it that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with what is mentioned in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	About wounds in the neck or similar ones that are made between the shoulders with a spear, knife, or lance or similar objects.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife and sometimes its depth is visible, then consider if there is air coming out of the wound when the patient exhales; if so, know that the wound is fatal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth to the wound and it is fresh with its own blood, then in the first hour put powder on it, but do not press it so that the blood does not get trapped inside and return to the heart, increasing the patient's pain, but instead apply an attractive ointment and loosen the edges of the wound twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not available, then apply a piece of clean cloth to the opening of the wound so that it can absorb any moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is accumulated in it can flow out.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if three days or more have passed since the wound and there is no spasm, tremor, or palpitations in the patient's heart, and other good signs are present, then know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with cupping glasses and other treatments until it is fully healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing process is delayed and there is continuous discharge, then know that a fistula has formed; treat it as described in its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the wound is caused by a spear or knife and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitches if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if it has reached the bone and there are fragments of bone inside, then twist the wound to remove those fragments, if they are separate.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separate, then leave them inside for the wound to dry up and make their removal easier.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And regarding other wounds that occur in other parts of the body, their treatment is similar to what has been mentioned.
De las plaguas del ventre.	About wounds in the abdomen.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The disorder that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, mild, or moderate.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	In the case of a severe disorder in the abdomen, sometimes there is prolapse of the intestines or nerves of the intestine, which requires more careful and subtle stitching.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	A minor rupture is also difficult to treat in another way, and I know that the reduction of it is even more difficult if you do not take care of its prolapse into its location immediately because it swells and becomes thick, making its insertion back into place difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And so the best disorder is a moderate one because the reduction of the intestine is not difficult in this case, unlike the difficulty in the two previously mentioned types.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And know that stitching in the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of stitches are common and suitable for stitching other wounds in the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other types of stitches are specific to other wounds but are also specific to abdominal stitching.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend that you explain and describe each one.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore, I say that when the wound is small and there is prolapse of the intestine through it due to some cause, and reduction of the intestine becomes difficult, then it is in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the rupture as previously mentioned, or because the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when it is like this, then it is necessary to scrape the intestine in such a way that you immerse a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water alone, or in water with quince, cumin, and fennel, and introduce it into the intestine until its inflammation subsides.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes it is necessary to add astringent agents in the water to resolve the inflammation, which is better than using water alone for this purpose.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when you see that the inflammation has subsided, then moisten the intestine with water mixed with mallow and chamomile because it eases its insertion back into place with little effort.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if it is difficult to insert the intestine back into place, then incise the rupture slightly with an instrument used for hemorrhoid surgery.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the primary treatment is better when it is appropriate and does not involve cutting or removing a necessary part that may lead to deficiency or weakness.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Regarding the instrument, let me describe its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One end of it is sharp and curved, while the other end is not sharp and blunt, with a fine tip that is not as thin as a spatula, but slightly more rounded at the end.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so when the wound is large and there is prolapse of the intestine through it, then its reduction should be done according to its natural shape and location, if possible on top of it, because that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the rupture is wide, and is in the lower part of the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their side, and place their upper hips higher than their head; and if it is above the belly, then you place their head and feet higher than the affected area.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, then place your attention and consideration always on this so that the affected side is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And it is also necessary to administer this in both major and minor wounds/afflictions.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small wounds, place what is prepared for it, and ensure that the minister is close by your side, holding the wound with their hand, adjusting the lips of it, and ensuring that nothing comes between the suture or causes any other issue.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	This is the common method of suturing: take a needle or count the number of stitches according to the width of the wound; then place it at the tip of the incision of the ring finger and pull the needle through with one hand, making sure not to pierce both ends of the thread, but rather the two ends of the skin behind the incision, until you make it penetrate from that side. And in this way, you have connected two ends of the thread and two ends of the skin, forming four rows.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then pull the thread double through the needle's loop, and sometimes stitch together both sides at once, and then bring the two lips of the wound together in a neat manner; and place your finger inside and insert another needle into it, and tie it to the first one with thread in the same way as before. And do not stop doing this with the needles until you have completed stitching the entire length of the wound.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and fineness because fine needles slightly cut into the flesh, while thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin. Therefore, it is necessary that they be medium in fineness and coarseness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted too close to both ends of the skin because this may slightly cut into the flesh and cause the wound to open up again before it has healed.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And the stitches should not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then make sure the ends of the needles are sharp so that they do not poke the patient while they sleep, and place cotton balls expanded on all sides over the stitches to keep the needle ends in place, leaving them there until you know for certain that the wound has healed.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this type of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as it may only require one or two stitches or so around the wound.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	And the second common suture is to stitch together the four ends of the skin and thread in one go with a needle that has fine and coarse thread wrapped around it.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And then, when you have penetrated these four ends with the needle, bring it back out from that same layer of skin where you started, so that the thread retreats and exits from the upper part of the wound, making the stitches resemble those in fabric where the threads are pulled tight.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And place between each stitch a length of thread equal to the width of the small finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this type of stitching is known among people.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this type of stitching, I sewed up the wound that a man had received in his belly from being stabbed with a knife, which was larger than a palm in size and had caused the intestines to protrude around two palms' worth of the middle part of the intestine and was located in the middle of the member. And this all occurred after the wound had been open for 24 hours since the intestines had come out.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the wound healed within 15 days or so, and I cured him and he recovered; and as a result, he lived for many years and was able to carry on with his usual activities.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that he would not recover; and it was a miracle, as I did not cure him with any ointment because it was in a location where no ointment or medicine could be found. Instead, I placed an old piece of cloth on the wound twice a day and frequently washed it with honey water until it was healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I will tell you about two types of stitching that are specific to my practice, as described in the narrative of the Word.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And one of them is to start stitching from the skin and then insert the needle from the outer layer to the inner layer.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And as the needle penetrates through the skin and into that same layer of flesh in a straight and long manner, leaving the end of the thread where you inserted the needle; then insert the needle from the inner layer to the outer layer at the other end of the wound, forming a complete stitch.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And after you have made that stitch, then make another one in the same manner by inserting the needle from the outer layer to the inner layer at the same end of the wound; leave the end of the thread on this side and insert the needle into the other end of the inner layer, forming another complete stitch.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make your incision with that instrument with which you make the incision enter into the abscess at the extremity of the member, which is at the opening, so that everything penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And begin from this side of the abscess, and with its extremity connect it to the other side, and extract the needle that is in the abscess, and return it to the abscess in this way, connecting the extremity of the abscess on the other side with this part of the limb; and extract the needle that is inside the patient's body.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this multiple times, and do it in such a way that you suture everything that is outside according to this example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method of suturing is that you use suture made from animal gut to sew together the skin, in such a way that you suture the abscess once on the side of the extremity of the needle, and leave the other part open until it has been completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second type of suturing, which I mentioned earlier and highly recommend, is done in the manner described by Galen, as follows: you sew together two similar parts with such precision that the physician connects all parts to their corresponding parts in a way that is natural for them; and then apply the extremity of one part to the other extremity of the patient's body, in the manner that I have described.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	It is necessary that you insert the needle in the extremity of the patient's body, on your side of the exterior part, and then make it penetrate into the interior part in that same location, leaving two sides of the wound exposed; and then turn the needle around and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside of the two sides of the wound.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then turn those sutures around and make each of them penetrate from the interior to the exterior on two sides of the patient's body that are opposite each other.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing that I previously mentioned.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is Galen's method.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	But they also said that suturing of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so you insert a thread in each of them and begin with the needle on your side, making it penetrate into the other side according to the suturing method used for intestines.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when there is a rupture in the middle location of the abdomen, then the suturing of it is more difficult than for other locations on the abdomen.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the treatment of one type of plague is the judgment for other types of plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The reason for this is that when you encounter the recent plague with its blood before the air alters it, and you return the intestines to their proper place and suture them properly, then you can apply a powder that promotes healing.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then apply a guiding ointment that is present before you until it forms a hard crust and drains the pus, and consolidates the abscess and wound; and treat it in the same way as the treatment for other types of plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if you are not present with the medications, then apply it as soon as possible, since it begins to ooze pus, and change it every two days, as I have taught you, until it is healed, because you will not need any other medication when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you are afraid that the plague may spread to the main members, then it is necessary that you soak a lion's wool in high-quality bath oil or rose oil and apply it to the area between the joints and below the armpits.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, because many wounds have appeared, then apply a mixture of wine and black stiptic powder to it, especially if the putrefaction has spread into the intestines and created an opening that penetrates into its cavity.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that the intestine that is thick-walled heals more easily than the one that is thin-walled.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is difficult to heal because the intestine that is called "gallbladder" does not receive healing from any plague that enters it; and this is due to the large number of veins in it, as well as its large size, and the delicate nature of its body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if what comes out of the plague is pus and you encounter it fresh, then return it in accordance with your judgment, as you would do for intestines.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has already spread and turned green or black, then you should strengthen it with a thread made of animal gut over the location that is darkened by it, so that blood flows from it, because in pus there are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then incise the other location and place the ends of the thread below the exterior part of the wound so that the attraction of it is relieved from the suturing of the tissue and the flow of pus from the wound.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Recapitulation of illnesses when they occur in the intestines.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When there is a rupture in the intestines and it is small, then it may be possible to restore it in some people, because I have seen this in a man who was wounded in his stomach with a lance and had an illness on the right side of his stomach, and the illness was old and had formed a fistula, and it released gas and feces.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore I continued the treatment of it, knowing that it was not suitable for healing, but I ceased to thin it out until it healed and the area became solid.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I, after seeing that the area had become solid, feared for the patient that he would experience an accident in his stomach; and none of this occurred because he was careful with his diet and continued to eat and drink in a healthy manner, and also took baths and exercised regularly.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced doctors have said that when a small illness occurs in the intestines, then it is necessary to bind it in this way: and that is, you take horseradish with large roots; and then you align the two lips of the wound and place one of those horseradishes, which has its mouth open, over the two lips of the wound; so when you press on it and close its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another horseradish next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with horseradishes, placing them one after the other according to the size of the entire wound.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then return it and suture the wound, leaving the heads of the horseradishes attached to the intestines until the intestines are healed, and do not cause any harm to the patient.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And it is possible that the intestine is tied with thin bile which is done by attaching the intestine of an animal to it, since it is sewn on; and it is necessary for you to take hold of the end of this bile-covered intestine, and strip it of flesh, and tie the end of it with bile, wrapped around, and then insert that bile in needles and sew the intestine with those needles, and return it to its place.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this method of suture with ants is only according to the way of trust and hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in a delicate intestine, then it will not be healing but rather further opening, and it will not heal completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every wound and abscess, when it becomes thin and old, forms an ulcer, and is not consolidated and always discharges pus, then, in any part of the body, it is universally called a fistula, and we call it this type of ulcer.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And a fistula is truly a hard and white nodule that is not painful and has a cavity like the shape of a bird's beak; and because of this, it is called a "raised ulcer," that is, a beaked ulcer.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is a moist ulcer in men, which always discharges pus; and the moisture is easily drained in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this moisture is abundant, and it is scarce, and it is thick, and it is thin.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And as I mentioned in the division, wounds that do not heal or are not on bare flesh are due to one of nine causes: one of which is a lack of blood in the body, or corruption in the wound, or bad quality of the matter in it; or because the medicine used for healing is inappropriate; or due to pestilence in the region; or due to the nature of the area, such as in Saragossa where illnesses are difficult to digest and slow to heal; or because there is a bone in the wound.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	I have shown all of these causes and their signs, as well as their treatment with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And so it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of fistulas, which is done through surgical methods using the hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, as some affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the hip, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae in the back, or one of the joints such as those between the hand and arm; and others are close to the main part of the body.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so among these fistulas, the one that is of this type is one of the difficult-to-heal diseases, and it does not receive treatment, and its management involves hard work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if any of the fistulas does not reach these locations that I mentioned, and you hope for a cure and trust in it, and want to understand its condition, then take an iron or a probe, and if the fistula follows a straight path, search for it with this tool.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin piece of lead, as lead has lightness in its body and can be bent according to the twist of the fistula.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula has many holes, it is not possible for you to recognize or understand it with the probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, purge the openings of the fistula with its own openings, as the moisture that you use for purging will flow through the other openings and clean them out as well.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then investigate carefully, in any way possible, so that you can understand if there is bone or nerve in this area, and whether the cavity of the fistula is deep or shallow, or if it has multiple openings and covers everything with all your strength, attention, and inquiry, by observing the patient's reaction to compression with your hand on the affected area, and similar signs and causes related to abscesses.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you have carefully considered all of these causes and determined their validity, then consider the treatment based on your confidence, that is, assess whether it is an apparent or nearby fistula in a healthy location, far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places that I mentioned.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then you dry out the fistula as previously described in its narration, and remove any pus or dead tissue from it, as well as anything that has been born in the opening of the flesh, such as pus or other similar substances, and cure the wound inside so that it heals completely.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of great depth and follows a straight path, then it is necessary to incise it in the preon as far as possible, and carefully clean out all of its dead tissue; and then apply hot compresses wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those inside the cavity of the fistula that you have captured with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this several times, until the sharp medicine has completely eroded all of the dead tissue in the cavity of the fistula caused by corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals completely.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this method, then you should cauterize the wound as previously recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you are certain of this, then you should investigate and dry it out as previously recommended, unless there is any reason to prohibit such a procedure due to issues related to veins, nerves, or the main part of the body as previously mentioned.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption or blackness in it, then you should cut out the area where the corruption is housed; and then cure it with what encourages the growth of new flesh until it heals completely.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and still discharges pus as before, then know that you have not yet achieved complete removal of the corruption; and so you must re-examine the area carefully and perform further analysis to determine the extent of the infection, and then thoroughly clean and cure it with your remaining strength. After this, restore it using appropriate treatments or dressings until it heals completely.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And so, if it heals, that is good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore your efforts have not succeeded.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupt bone is small or can be easily removed, then you should remove it with fine forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are multiple bone fragments, then you should carefully extract all of them, leaving behind no remaining cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if there is any obstacle to the removal of moisture or in its incision, and there is no fear or mistake in doing so, then you should cut the ligaments or flesh that are present, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at this time, then place a poultice on the wound that promotes healing, and leave it in place until it surrounds the bones with flesh and ligaments. Then keep the wound open so that it does not close up, and maintain pressure on the section of the wound that you have incised during your procedure.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you are afraid, then place a compress soaked in a solution of three parts wine and one part oil, or a compress soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any other green ointments on it, as when these ligaments rot, the bones will separate from them and the attraction will be relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a large bone such as the bone of the thigh or hip, and only the surface of it is affected by corruption, then cut away the affected area with precision until the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	If the corruption that affects him is significant and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close off that area and have it incise where the corruption has spread, and then cure what is inside so that it becomes solid.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	I recommend to you what to do for a man when his thigh swells up, so that you place an example and aid over your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	A young man of about thirty years old experienced pain in his thigh, and the part affected inside is on the matter within the body that has reached the thigh, and it is matter of an abscess with a large abscess, and it was not caused by anything external.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then the time passed with that until the abscess burst due to the error of the doctors, and pus flowed out, and the cure was delayed until the leg became fistulized, and many wounds formed which all emitted pus and bodily fluids.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the young man was treated by many doctors for about two years, and they were not knowledgeable in the art, until I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the leg of the man and the matter that was flowing from those wounds to a great extent, and his entire body was weakened and his complexion was yellowish.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then I inserted my finger into one of those wounds and reached the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I carefully examined all the wounds, and found that they were connected to all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I considered and made an incision into one of those wounds until I exposed a portion of the bone, and found that it was corrupted and had turned to earth and become necrotic; and a part of the leg had also become corrupted, where it had penetrated the medulla.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I removed what I had exposed and prepared the bone that was now visible.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I thought that the problem was not in the bone but rather in the corruption which had to be cut away and removed, and I had already started this process.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I attempted to heal the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, but it did not become solid.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I re-examined and found that the bone was still infected, even after my previous treatment.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And then I removed what appeared to be the infected material, and attempted to heal and restore the wound, but it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered even more infection and continued to carefully cut away the bone little by little until I had removed a significant portion of it, along with its marrow. I then used medicine to restore what was left, which healed slightly and became solid.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And there was no need for further operations on the wound and removal of tissue, except for the positioning of the sutures due to the patient's weak constitution and fear of death, as he frequently experienced fainting spells caused by excessive evacuation.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so the wound healed completely, leaving no hardened flesh in its place, and the limb was restored to its proper position within the body, regaining its function and vitality. The patient also returned to his normal habits and did not experience any adverse effects or harm in any way.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if there is a protruding bone in the wounded area, then it is necessary to proceed as follows: first, take a strong and flexible ligament and tie it around the end of that protruding bone, and instruct someone to pull on it. Then apply a thicker piece of linen over the skin near the bone, and extend the limb to draw the skin towards the wound. This will expose the flesh above the area where you wish to make the incision, allowing you to cut without damaging the surrounding tissue.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a piece of wood or board under the bone in a proper position, as this will not prevent the saw from cutting through the infected flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And the sawing must be done gradually over the infected area, as the corruption may not be visible on the surface and could extend deeper into the bone, requiring additional sawing in other areas.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	But if the bone is infected and not protruding, with one section connected to another, and the corruption is in the middle or a portion of it, then you must expose all the flesh from all sides. Then place a piece of wood underneath, and saw through the first section where the infection is, continuing until the other section is reached.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And the sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption as we previously mentioned.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in a joint, then make an incision into the corrupted joint and saw through the bone where it connects to the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if the corruption extends between two joints, then it is not reasonable to proceed in this manner.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the chest of the hand or foot, it is difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you and cut it out accordingly, cleaning it as best as possible based on your abilities, and ensuring that each action is appropriate for the situation, without causing any harm to veins or nerves.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know that the instruments and saws used for cutting bones vary greatly depending on their location, preparation, thickness, fineness, size, rarity, and hardness, which is why it is necessary to prepare suitable instruments for each type of operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation depends on the type of instrument you require; when you have extensive study and long experience in these methods of this art, as well as knowledge of various illnesses, then you will already have what is necessary for treating any ailment with appropriate instruments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And now, at the end of this chapter, I will provide you with a list of instruments that you will need, including simple ones which you will use for your practice and experiments on others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of file:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The head of this file should be shaped like a star-headed nail, and its teeth should be similar to the points of an awl.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not appropriate to use this file except on joint heads when they are corrupted or have a large and wide opening.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of a larger rasp than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of a smaller rasp:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of a flat rasp:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another saw that is decently made: it should be shaped like an arc from the upper part and have a sharp edge of iron, and the member of it should be like a well-made dagger.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a rasp with a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another fine rasp:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another curved rasp:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small razor similar to a thorn:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of an engraver with which bones are engraved/cut:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another smaller cutter:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another cutter; this one similar to a saw, and its tip is like a saw, it is used in many places in the treatment of bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a saw which is suitable for the treatment of one who has holes in their bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And its tip is triangular and sharp-pointed:
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly, it is appropriate for all the causes mentioned regarding razors, cutters, and saws:
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incisions at the tips (extremities) and of bone setting:
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can become damaged either due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with medicines and the treatment is not effective, or sometimes the corruption spreads to the member which is not affected by any other cause. In such cases, it is necessary to make incisions in that member where the corruption has spread, so that the patient avoids death or a more serious affliction that could lead to significant damage to the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of one who is affected, is that the member turns black while it is being cauterized, as if the fire has already burnt it, or you can observe the darkness spreading within that member until it covers all the body; and then, quickly make an incision in that place.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous causes such as a sea scorpion or a viper or a centipede and similar ones.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or the striking is in the extremity of the finger, then you should make incisions in the finger and not leave any space for the corruption to enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should make incisions in that part of the wrist near the fireplace, and not leave any space for the corruption to enter into the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead, insert the arm into the sheath at the joint. (I'm assuming "coyde" is a typo and should be "coxa," which means "thigh" or "hip bone" in Latin and was borrowed by French and Spanish)
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	If corruption has passed and the disease has spread around the thigh, then at this point the patient will die; and to administer another remedy for this condition in treatment is a matter of finding an effective cure.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	Similarly, do the same for the foot when corruption has spread to the end of the toe; then insert that into one of the joints (or knuckles).[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/noze](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/noze)
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	If it takes hold on the skin of the foot, then insert the whole foot (into a treatment or medication).[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pente](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pente)
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it reaches the nail, then insert the leg into the joint of the nail (or "at the joint of the digit").[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/denol](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/denol)
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached beyond the nail, then there is no help for it but to let nature take its course and allow the patient to die.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pervenguda](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pervenguda)
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the method for inserting or binding the member is as follows: you should tighten the ligament below the part where you want to make the incision, and then tighten another ligament over the spot; and have an assistant stretch a ligament below the area, while another assistant stretches another ligament above it; and then separate the flesh that lies between these two ligaments with a space of about half a finger's width, so as to expose all the flesh; and then make the incision or binding.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And it is necessary that a cloth be placed on all sides of the wound so as not to touch it, and that the patient has a swelling or abscess properly treated with caution.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/li](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/li) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leiso](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/leiso) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apostema](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apostema)
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if there is bleeding while you are operating, then cauterize the area appropriately, or place some powder that constricts blood on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/coytadament](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/coytadament) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/restrenhentz](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/restrenhentz)
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the infected member with an appropriate ligament and treat it until it heals.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plaguat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/plaguat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/convenient](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/convenient)
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	I advise you to treat the same condition in a man as occurred to me in my foot: this is when there is blackness in the foot, accompanied by dry heat that resembles a fire's burning (or "scorching").[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/endevenc](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/endevenc) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adustio](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adustio)
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And this corruption first occurred in his toe, spreading throughout the whole foot.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tendec](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/tendec)
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And so that man prepared for himself the same kind of pus as was needed to treat the member with the intensity required by the pain and dry heat; he inserted his foot into the joint (or "incised it at the joint"), and then healed it.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atrobec](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/atrobec)[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inscidic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inscidic)
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the nail of his index finger.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ma](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ma) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/indic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/indic)
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And so he came to me, and I treated him by performing a procedure that involved discharging the excess fluid with what I applied on his hands, in order to purify his body; but this did not work, and the excess fluid began to move to the other finger, starting at the hand. [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superfluitat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/superfluitat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mundificacio](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mundificacio)
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And he asked me to cut open his hand, but I did not want to do that, hoping for the success of discharging the excess fluid; and also fearing the incision of his hand might lead to death, since the patient's condition was already quite serious.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cazement](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cazement)
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And because he lost hope in me, he returned to his homeland and later reported to me that the man had cut open his entire hand and then was healed.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/desperec](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/desperec) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inscidic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/inscidic)
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	I have only shared this story in order to assist those suffering from this disease and provide guidance on how it should be treated.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adjutori](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/adjutori)
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	This sentence appears to be in Latin and it means "About the cure of sinuses and the quality of clysters with medicines."[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinuum](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinuum) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisterizationis](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisterizationis)[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/medicinis](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/medicinis)
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in fleshy parts of the body and its space is elongated, forming a collection of pus, and it bursts and becomes perforated, and pus comes out of it, leaving a hollow area like a vessel, and the skin above it remains thin like a delicate cloth, and corruption has not reached behind it, nor does it affect bone or nerve or ligament; this is called a sinus, not a fistula.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/carnoze](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/carnoze) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apostema](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apostema) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sania](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sania) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/quays](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/quays) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/codena](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/codena) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/deriera](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/deriera) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/os](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/os) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nervi](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/nervi) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/liament](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/liament) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinu](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sinu) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fistula](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fistula)
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But if the space is elongated to such an extent that corruption reaches a member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/esprema](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/esprema) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/zukem](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/zukem)
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the treatment for it is to cut open that skin entirely as it turns around (or "revolves"), particularly when it becomes thin and delicate like a cloth; and make sure that it does not stick to the wound due to its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the skin will stick and that corruption has not reached behind it; and there is a small opening in the skin, then treat this with an enema.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisteri](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisteri) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spassitut](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/spassitut)
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And consider the sinus, and if it is large, and its smell is fetid; then treat it with an enema made from Egyptian medicine that consists of oil, wine, and crushed seeds of cumin, which are mixed together and placed in a vessel, and heated over a fire until the medicine turns red and acquires the scent of honey. [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fetent](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/fetent) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/egipciac](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/egipciac) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ziniar](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/ziniar) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/partidas](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/partidas) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/specitut](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/specitut) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mel](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mel)
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; and use this solution to administer an enema to the sinus, while also closing its openings; and leave the medicine inside for a period of two hours.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/necessari](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/necessari) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dissolveys](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/dissolveys) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/aygua](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/aygua) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisteriza](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/clisteriza) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/strenh](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/strenh) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/horas](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/horas)
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then extract the remains of it; and do this for so many days until the sinus is purified and the foul odor is gone.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sprecio](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sprecio) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mundificat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/mundificat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/remauguda](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/remauguda) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pudor](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/pudor)
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And sometimes an enema is administered with ash water, when this medicine is not available to you; and you should take the ashes of vine branches and mix it with water, and then use that mixture for the enema until you are certain that the sinus has been healed.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vitz](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/vitz) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cola](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/cola)
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the patient cannot tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed with cumin seeds, three hundred of them; and also use wine and honey mixed together, for it is the property of honey to cleanse and wash, while wine makes the sinus sticky, particularly when the wine has a surplus of astringent and dry qualities.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And when you do this several times and are certain that the sinus has healed, then administer an enema using a solution that causes flesh to grow in it.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/naysser](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/naysser)
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And this is done by taking diaphoretic decoction and dissolving it in rose oil and astringent wine; or by administering an enema with various medicines and ingredients that have the properties described in the treatise on enemas.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diaphoretic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diaphoretic) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decoccio](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/decoccio) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rozat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rozat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/stiptic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/stiptic) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enguentz](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/enguentz)
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the nozzle of the enema, then gradually widen it using a small iron instrument, while applying heat in the form of a cloth wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it has been widened.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/calgua](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/calgua) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/egipciac](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/egipciac) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/basilicon](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/basilicon)
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly, if the opening is wide, then use stitches to narrow it and leave enough space for the nozzle of the enema to be inserted without adding anything else.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sutura](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sutura)
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the opening from which the branch protrudes is located above, then dry it in the lowest part of the sinus so that the branch moves downward instead of upward, for when the branch is constricted in the narrowness of the sinus, flesh is generated in it.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/corr](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/corr) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/preondeza](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/preondeza) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/engendrada](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/engendrada)
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if you are unable to dry the sinus near the bone as desired, then it is necessary to prepare the member by making an incision so that the branch protrudes lightly and easily, without being retained in it by any cause.[https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/prepares](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/prepares) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apparelhat](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/apparelhat) [https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/retengut](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/retengut)
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take consolidative medications to be applied to the appropriate sinus with the aim of extending those [humors/effects] onto a linen cloth.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And prepare a linen cloth of sufficient size to cover the entire sinus; then, using forceps, make an incision at the right side of the sinus's orifice, making the hole slightly larger than the orifice itself. Next, spread the granulations onto another piece of linen in the amount corresponding to the size of the incision and place it over the area at a distance from the sinus's orifice so as to alleviate the flow of discharge from the arm without removing the larger cloth; only remove the large cloth briefly for dressing changes.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But keep what is over the orifice of the sinus always raised to ensure that what has accumulated in the arm can drain out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know whether what is flowing from the arm is abundant or scanty, and whether it is digested or undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And, in doing so, pay attention to the location of the sinus and check whether it causes pain for the patient or if there is a collection of pus (apostema) in it.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And when your treatment is continued in this manner and you see that the matter discharged on the orifice of the sinus has adhered or is beginning to adhere, then gently detach it or wait three days. When you detach the clot, change the dressing for a new one and apply fresh ointment.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if the sinus has a deep space and emits subtle viruses, do not be alarmed by the adherence of these substances to it, as this is a sign that the healing process has started. This occurs in certain individuals who have a slow tissue generation rate in their wounds, while others experience the opposite effect.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the sinus has been draining for several days and the discharge is undigested, then you know that it has not yet healed. If healing is delayed due to prolonged treatment, adjust the medication's level of dryness or wetness based on its substance and effect. For example, if the ointment is too wet or contains an excess of ingredients, use a drying agent like diascordium to balance it out.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	The most important thing in treating the wound is to take diascordium ointment and dissolve it in roasted oil. Then, add some of this mixture to a powder made from crushed chamomile flowers and apply it to the affected area.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And in this action, when there is no discharge, use diascordium ointment or roasted honey until it becomes thick, and apply it to the wound. Alternatively, take myrrh, aloe, and resin, grind them into a powder while heating them over the fire, then mix the powder with honey and spread it on a cloth, placing it over the sinus. Do the same with the honey, grinding it until it becomes thick, and mixing it with powdered resin before applying it to a cloth and placing it over the wound.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes, use longarza root and lily of the valley (which is called lily of the valley) and powdered iris and centaury, using these simple herbs individually or combined, grinding them and sifting them over the honey that I mentioned earlier; then, apply it to the wound.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus remains unhealed despite this treatment, it is a sign that corruption has spread to its core and caused an abscess in the bones or other hard tissues such as tendons. In this case, treat it with fistulization therapy, as described earlier.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Here is a treatment for paronychia (infection of the nail fold), onychia (inflammation of the nail), digital abscesses, and fingertip amputations:
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaricia is an abscess that forms under the nail of a finger or toe, and it can also appear on other fingers. If prolonged and its treatment is undervalued, it may become an abscess within an abscess or become corrupted, causing pus to flow into the nail bed, which in turn can cause the entire nail to rot. This can lead to a foul odor as the corruption spreads to the bone, causing necrosis of the finger's tip and making it turn black.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Therefore, when you have the condition described earlier and find that your treatment is not effective, it is necessary to remove all of the excess nail using iron tools and then cauterize the wound with a hot instrument, as cautery is beneficial in this case.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	However, if the bone is intact and the nail is healthy, but the overgrown portions of the nail compress the surrounding skin, causing it to be punctured and damaged, then you should make a fine incision just below the angle of the nail that cuts through the skin, raise it up gently, and cut into the affected flesh with ease. Apply corrosive burning medications on what remains of the flesh until everything is removed. Then, cure it with ointments until healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already affected the bone, then it is necessary to cut into and extract the bone, as there can be no healing while the bone remains corrupt.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that the corruption and decay have spread to the finger, then you should cut into it at one of its nodes according to where it is most swollen, and treat it until healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if the nail is subjected to percussion or friction and causes intense pain, then it is advisable to first perform a phlebotomy on the patient, and then dry out the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse section from top to bottom, ensuring that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail. This is because such a cut could cause severe pain for the patient and lead to the growth of excess skin in the area, which would exacerbate the problem. Afterward, treat the affected area with medication to alleviate pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	However, in some cases, the problem may be due to an ingrown nail, which is common in certain individuals and can cause excessive growth of flesh or bone, or even develop into a nail-like structure in severe cases.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some are born in the joint's ligaments or in certain knuckles of the fingers.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	However, one born in the knuckles of the finger is not problematic, but if it occurs near the joints, there is a higher chance of complications.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those that are fleshy, the incision should be light and made along the edge of the flesh with a broad-edged spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	However, for those that are born near the joints, the treatment is difficult, and therefore, be cautious with its incision.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But for those that are born near the knuckles, it is necessary to make an incision at the beginning of the flesh along the edge of the bone with a round cut, and then use one of those suitable saws to remove the excess flesh, and treat it until healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	However, if there is a consolidation that occurs in the fingers due to frequent injuries or by birth or due to wound healing or burn injury, then it is necessary to cut through the consolidation until the fingers return to their natural shape.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then place between them cloths soaked in roasted oil to prevent re-consolidation, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are fully healed.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	Similarly, if consolidation occurs in the palm of the hand, you should cut it away according to its shape and size, following the contours of the affected area.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Regarding incision of vice, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose veins, which are large, swollen veins filled with excessive melancholic fluid that appear in various parts of the body, most commonly in the legs, and particularly among travelers, laborers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore, it is advisable to administer a strong purge of black bile several times, and also to bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	However, the treatment of varicose veins with iron tools can be done in two ways: one is to make an incision and draw out black blood, while the other way is to raise the vein and extract it entirely.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The incision is made in the following way: first, apply hot water to the leg up to the point where the thick blood has coagulated, which is a sticky substance in the calf. Then bind the patient's leg to the upper part of the thigh with a bandage, and dry the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide incision. Next, use the back of your hand to press on the dark blood from below the calf upward towards the wound until you have extracted the desired amount that you deem necessary based on the patient's condition.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then bandage it, and instruct the patient to avoid foods that cause black bile production.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	Repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticeable to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	However, elevation of varicose veins can be done in the following way: You should raise the leg of the patient and check for any swelling. Then place them in warm water up to their waist and add hot water to the affected limb until it turns red and the veins become prominent. Alternatively, if a bath is not available, have the patient engage in strenuous exercise to cause sweating and promote circulation in the affected area. [6]
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then dry the skin in the area above or below the affected vein, either along the length of the vein near the ankle or behind it, or at the base of the foot near the heel.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then use hooks to open the skin and extract the vein from all sides until you feel it in your touch, and this is apparent by the sensation of the ropy cord becoming darker in color.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And once you have removed it, you will see a white cord-like structure, which is the extracted vein.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	Then place the vein below the incision so that it is raised and separated from the skin, and suspend it with a golden weight or lead.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then dry another section above the incision for three fingers' width and extract the skin from above the vein until it is visible.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then lift the vein and make an incision in the rear section near the heel, extract it from there and elevate it until it comes out through the second incision. Finally, extract the remaining portion of the vein above this incision.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do this until you extract the portion of the vein that is highest or deepest among all incisions, until all of it has been removed, and then make an incision there.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If the patient does not obey your instructions to extract and elevate the vein, then insert a large needle with double-strength thread into it and tie it up, and extract it. Alternatively, place a rod under the skin below the incision and rotate your hand around it until the vein is extracted.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	But be careful not to cut it too deeply, as breaking the vein would make it difficult to elevate and could cause harm to the patient due to complications.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Once you have removed the entire vein, then apply wool soaked in vinegar and roasted oil to the affected area, and treat it until it heals.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	If the vein is contracted with twisting and winding around its parts, which deviates from what we have described, then it is necessary to make incisions along the entire length of the twist and in the areas where it is wrapped, and suspend it with hooks until you raise it completely. [4]
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And be careful not to cut the vein or damage it while making incisions, as this would make it difficult for you to elevate it later. Use your judgment and caution in performing this procedure.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Shape of the incision which has been dried up:
Forma de unci orp:	Shape of a leech:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not the same shape as a hook or sharp-pointed, so that it does not harm the vein; and it has thick flexibility like a lion, because if it were too fine, it would cut into the vein with its fineness; it has an excess of thickness, as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the extraction of the leg vein.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs, in hot lands such as Egypt and Arabia, and in the dry lands of India and other similar places that have little vegetation or water.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And its growth is due to putrefaction that comes after the intestines, just as poisonous snakes and worms grow in the body, as well as lizards and worms generated between the intestines and flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	A sign of the onset of this vein is inflammation in the leg, followed by swelling at the site; and soon the location begins to resemble a small blossoming plant, as if a root has emerged from the swollen area.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And when the extremity appears, it is necessary to wrap a lead weight around it, weighing between one and two dragmas, and leave the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as often as any pus or fluid leaks from the area, wrap it up with lead and bandage it again.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if it becomes very swollen, then cut a small portion of it and bandage the rest; but do not puncture the bulge itself until it has emerged completely, because if you do so beforehand it may contract and enter back into the flesh, causing abscesses, inflammation, and ulcers in that location.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Therefore it is necessary to treat it gently and extract it gradually, until it has been completely removed from the body without leaving any residue or trace behind.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein emerges in some men that is as long as five palms and has reached me that it emerged one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is lanced during the appropriate time for treatment, then insert the probe into the opening and pierce the vein with a long incision through the body, until all of the matter has been evacuated; administer putrefaction to the area for several days using medicines; and treat it as you would an abscess.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches, and most often when it appears at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself, and many holes appear there, and each branch emerges from its own hole.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And so treat it as we have said in the division, and with what has been said above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	On the sectioning (cutting) of worms generated under the skin and it is called "bovine disease."
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called "bovine disease" in some countries, because it often affects cows and is a type of worm that is born between the intestines and flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is visible as it moves from one part of the body to another until it breaks through the skin.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as with the growth of worms and snakes and earthworms and tapeworms in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for its malice, because when it moves through the body and rises to the head, and reaches the ear, it easily enters and destroys the ear, and this happens frequently.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And so when you want to cure it and remove it, then do not do anything unless the worm moves and appears at the skin's surface where it can be felt, and then it is necessary to press firmly on top of it and on its sides with force, and dry it out and extract it.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is embedded in the flesh and you cannot find it, then you should apply a hot cautery to the location until it dies, because the most feared aspect of it is its corruption, which can cause decay just as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	But if you see it reach the head near the ear, then press firmly on top of the eyebrow with strong pressure, and dry it out and extract it; and the patient must use purifying medicines for their body that evacuate bad putrid humors, and avoid foods that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the incision of "nafir" illness.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called "nafir" in our land and is a pain that appears in certain limbs and then moves from one part of the body to another.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen the second thing that I will recommend to you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small swelling in the great vein of the arm, and after it had been open for an hour, I saw that the swelling moved like a worm moving upward, but more gently than before, as if it were liquid silver flowing from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then the pain moved from that location and entered the muscle, and it remained there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then it moved into the other part of the body until it reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And she told me that it moved through her whole body, as I had seen; and I was astonished at its movement and its speed from one member to another.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen something similar in my own experience, but I have also seen many instances where pain is moved from member to member.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I have not seen this with the feet as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I do not think that this is the case with the woman, because she is old and her body is dry, with exposed veins; and in her case, it appears that the sensation of the gas moving is more pronounced.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies with narrow veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as for the treatment of it, and when the patient feels the pain, then you should not treat it as I have described before; instead, you should apply pressure to that area and gently squeeze it until the gas is released and the pain dissipates, and cauterize the location.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it with your own eyes, then you should treat it with bodily evacuation and by inducing the expulsion of gas; and cleanse it with stinking pills and similar things, such as serapias pills.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Regarding the removal of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are varied in type, depending on the materials they are made of and the location in the body where they become lodged; for their diversity is such that some have large points, small points, concave points, blunt points, sharp points with three angles, pointed tips with tongues, or feathered flights.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And those arrows that are suited for particular parts of the body and the wounds they cause are of two types: for the limbs or principal members, such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and their like; and when an arrow has lodged in any one of these members and appears to you to be a sign of imminent death, I will describe what must be done in this case; therefore, it is necessary to avoid extracting the arrow from those in which death is certain, even in the most favorable circumstances. But when such signs do not appear, and the arrow is not deeply embedded in the member, then you should remove it and treat the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And the signs of imminent death are when an arrow has pierced through bone and exited at the skull, which is located above the brain, causing violent swelling, blind spots in vision, dizziness, paralysis in the limbs, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting of bile, severe difficulty speaking and loss of voice, white fluid seeping from the wound like dust, and similar signs of decay in the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore, if these signs appear, then you should refrain from treating the wound and extracting the arrow, unless it is absolutely necessary.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	And the signs of an arrow that has pierced the heart, when it is near the left nipple and feels as if it has been lodged in a hard place and not one that is visible; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse, blood flows from the wound, there is coldness in the extremities, chills, and fainting; therefore, know that death is imminent.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs of an arrow that has pierced a lung are foamy blood flowing from the wound, swelling in the veins near the throat, a change in color in the patient, great difficulty breathing, and a desire for cool air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the arrow has pierced the fascia, which is in the feet, then the pain will be located near the small ribs, causing intense and sharp pain, as well as difficulty breathing and sighing, but it will not affect all the limbs or muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if the arrow has pierced the stomach, then there will be signs of undigested food near the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if the arrow has pierced the belly and become embedded there, then there will be a tear in the wound or ripped tissue or intestines, and it is unlikely that the patient can be saved by extracting the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow has pierced the bladder and caused it to release urine, and there are signs of infection or inflammation near the wound, then the pain will be severe, and you should know that this is a fatal injury.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, shoulders, shoulder blades, vertebrae in the spine, collarbones, hips, and thighs, can be saved with favorable conditions if the arrow has not punctured a vein or artery and is not venomous.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand my recommendations for treating them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This is because I once treated a man who had been struck by an arrow in the lacrimal gland of his eye, near his nose; I extracted it from him at another location, below his ear lobe, and he was healed without any injury to his eye.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	I also once extracted an arrow from a judge who had been struck in the corner of his eye, below the eyelid; the arrow was concealed and could not be seen except for a small protrusion attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow with sharp points, like those used by Turkish archers, made of iron shaped like a lion without ears.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	Yes, the judge, and his eye was not injured as a result.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	I also once extracted an arrow from a Christian man who had been struck in the neck; it was an Arabic arrow with wings, and I carefully inserted my fingers around it to remove it, as it had become deeply embedded in his neck; but I was able to skillfully extract it, and the Christian man was healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	I also extracted an arrow from a man who had been struck in the stomach, and I thought that he would die as a result; but after thirty days passed without any change in his condition, I carefully inserted my fingers around the arrow and gently removed it, and he was healed without any further injury.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	I also saw a man in whom an arrow had pierced his back and become lodged there; the wound healed over, but after seven years had passed, the arrow emerged near his hip.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	I also saw a woman who had been struck by an arrow in her stomach, and the wound had healed over without causing any injury or change in her condition, and she did not experience any difficulty with her natural functions.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	I also saw another man who had been struck by an arrow in the face, and the wound healed over without causing him any significant pain or injury; there were many similar cases to this one as well.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	I also extracted an arrow from the nose of a king's servant; it had entered near the middle of his nostril and veered slightly to the right, but the entire arrow was concealed within.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	I was called upon to treat him within three days of being struck by the arrow.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	When I examined him, I found the wound from the arrow to be quite small, and I carefully probed the area but did not feel anything; however, he reported feeling a sharp pain below his right earlobe, and so I realized that this pain must have been caused by the tip of the arrow. [15] E adonc yeu extrayssi la sageta entro le troys dias del cazement de lu per aquela extremitat la qual era en le golayro de lu; e apres yeu feyte alcuna curacio sobre aquella plagua, e es sanat.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	I applied a poultice to the area that contained attractive and digestive properties, in order to encourage the formation of pus around the wound, which would help me locate the position of the arrowhead so that it could be removed more easily.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there were no significant complications as a result of the arrow remaining in its position, and I continued to apply the poultice for several days without incident; the wound healed over during this time, but after many days had passed, the patient suddenly felt the arrowhead inside his nose and informed me of it. [17] E adonc yeu extrayssi la sageta entro aquel jorn per le razitz del nas de lu e apres feyte alcuna curacio sobre aquella plagua, e es sanat.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	I then applied a caustic and penetrating medication to the wound for several days until it became raw, and when I probed it with my finger, I found that the tip of the arrow was still attached to its shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	I continued to apply this caustic medication to the wound until I was able to clearly see the tip of the arrow, and I persisted with this treatment for several months as necessary.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	As the wound became larger and it became possible for me to insert forceps into it, I continued to probe and manipulate the arrow until one day I was able to extract it using carefully designed forceps, as will be described in greater detail later; and after removing the arrow, I treated the wound.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Many doctors believed that the cartilage in the nose could not be repaired, but I was able to restore it and heal the wound completely, such that the patient suffered no further injuries or complications as a result.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	I have described the extraction of some arrows to give you an idea of the principles and techniques involved, but these methods are not comprehensively covered in this text, as they are beyond its scope and require further study and understanding of the art and its definitions.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	The wise craftsman compares little to much, and the present to the absent; he finds new operations and instruments in response to unexpected causes that arise in the practice of his art.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And so I say that arrows are not easily removed from the members in which they have become embedded, but rather only by two methods: either by drawing out the arrow from the location where it has entered, or by moving it towards the opposite end of the member.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And when an arrow is removed from the location where it has entered, this occurs either by drawing out a flesh arrow that has penetrated deeply and become stuck, or else by extracting an arrow that has been shot into a soft tissue area. [1] E aquela que es gitada per le contrari de la autra partida so en doas manieyras: o per extraccio; o per trauccio.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	If the arrow does not easily come out at the time it was shot in, then it is necessary to leave it alone for several days until the surrounding flesh has become less swollen and inflamed, making it easier to extract or draw out.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	Similarly, if an arrow has become embedded in bone and does not come out easily, then it is necessary to leave it alone for several days and apply traction and movement to the area each day until it becomes dislodged.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if the arrow still does not come out after several days, then it is necessary to carefully perforate around the circumference of the arrow in the bone until the surrounding area has become more swollen and inflamed, making it easier to extract the arrow.[1] E si la sageta es gitada a le partida del membre en que·l loc de la plagua no so vuid, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela per alcus dias entro que poyresca le carn que es al enviro de lu.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head and has already begun to affect one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient such symptoms which you see and recognize, then at this point refrain from extracting the arrow and leave it inside for a few days; for if the arrow reaches the brain, the death of the patient will not be delayed.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is only lodged in the outer part of the bone and does not penetrate into the brain, and the patient remains stable for a few days without any symptoms, then devise a plan to extract the arrow and extract it carefully.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is deeply embedded and resists extraction, then administer a poultice around the arrow as we have recommended, and take care of the wound until it heals.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is hidden within the body and is no longer sensitive to touch, then probe the area carefully, and if you feel it, then pull it out with appropriate instruments suitable for extracting arrows.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	But if you cannot reach it due to the severity of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein in the way, then enlarge the wound to make it possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	But if it is lodged in the ears and held there, then carefully cut away the flesh surrounding it from all sides using every means possible; and devise a plan to extract it, even if you have to break the ears or dislocate them forcefully in order to remove it.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you extract the arrow from any location, then use twisting motion with your hand and forceps on all sides to make it come out; and do so with great care and precision to prevent the arrow from breaking and to ensure a safe and easy extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	But if you cannot extract it at this time, then leave it in place for a few days until the surrounding tissues become more manageable, and then try again later when the situation has improved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if attempting to extract it causes excessive bleeding, then administer the treatment for controlling bleeding as described in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And be careful not to damage any veins, nerves, or tendons while extracting the arrow, and use every means possible to ensure safe and easy removal; and do so with ease, calmness, patience, and steadiness as we have recommended.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore, try to extract the arrow in such a way that the patient's position matches the one in which the arrow was originally lodged, as this is more beneficial.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not possible, then do what you can using any suitable positions.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But for arrows that have been shot from the opposite direction or that have begun to penetrate through to the outside, or if the tip of the arrow is protruding from the skin and can be felt or seen, then dry the area around it; and make an incision in accordance with the size of the forceps being used; and then extract the arrow carefully as it will come out easily.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is lodged in the bone, then twist the blade against its direction of entry until the arrow moves within the bone, and gradually widen the incision until you can extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	But if that is not possible, then leave it in place for a few days and try again later when it has become more loose.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is still inside, then push it further in.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft has fallen out and you want to administer a push, then insert a suitable concave instrument into the wound to create a space for the arrowhead, and then use it to gently push in the arrowhead.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrowhead is concave, then insert a strong instrument into it to relieve it, and push it in gently.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut away all the flesh surrounding the wound if possible, and treat it with appropriate remedies.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow has entered the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the ribs, and is close enough to be felt with probing, and can be safely dried, then do so; and take care not to damage any veins or nerves while extracting it, and clean the wound as necessary, and treat it until healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps used for pulling out arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	The ends of the forceps are shaped like bird's beaks, with serrated edges that grip the arrow firmly to prevent it from slipping out.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And various types of forceps are made for different purposes: large ones for larger arrows and smaller ones for smaller arrows; some with wide jaws for wider wounds, and narrower ones for narrower wounds; and some with stronger grips for more severe injuries and weaker ones for less severe injuries.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Shape of the concave instrument for pushing in the arrowhead: it has a curved end like the beak of a bird to make insertion easier and relieve any blockage, allowing the arrowhead to be pushed in gently.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of blunt instrument for pushing in: typically long and slender with a rounded end, suitable for applying gentle pressure to dislodge an obstruction.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	Like a rod or probe, to relieve any blockage in the concave arrowhead and push it in with ease.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	On venesection (cutting open of veins).
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins commonly used for venesection are usually three: [Note: in medieval medical texts, the number XXX was often used to indicate the saphenous vein in the leg or arm, which was a common site for bloodletting.] Of these, sixteen are located in the head: [Note: The precise location and number of veins in the head varies depending on the source.] Of these, sixteen are located in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears, called the temporal veins; two herb veins on the temples; two lacrimal veins at the inner corners of the eyes, called the aspicient veins; one frontal vein in the middle of the forehead; one nasal vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins in the neck; two labial veins above the upper lip; two labial veins below the lower lip; and two angular veins near the corners of the mouth, called the algelic veins; and two sublingual veins beneath the tongue. [Note: This list is not anatomically accurate and should be taken as a general guide only. The exact number, location, and names of veins in the head vary depending on the source.]
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins commonly used for venesection in the arms are five: [Note: The precise location and number of veins in the arm varies depending on the source.] [Quan es en la cubita, e aquela que es entre le braç e l’aixella, e aquela que es aprop lo col, e aquela que es aprop le coratge, e aquela que es en le mieg loc del braz. Because one of these is the cephalic vein, which corresponds to the wild lettuce vein in animals; and it is commonly called "the head vein" and is superficial and small, formed by a branch of the basilic vein and another branch of the cephalic vein. And this vein is called "the vein of the whole body" by the people, while the basilic vein is the one that runs along the inner side of the arm and is named "citillar", and it is also known as "the abdominal vein" by laypeople; and the radial artery, which runs near the bone, is the one that is incised for venesection and is the most visible on the surface. And the median cubital vein, which is located between the cephalic vein and the little finger, has two branches in it. [Note: This list is not anatomically accurate and should be taken as a general guide only. The exact number, location, and names of veins in the arm vary depending on the source.]
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the foot and calf there are three veins: one of these is located below the curvature of the big toe of the wild lettuce vein; the second is saphenous, and its location is below the calf of the domestic lettuce vein; and the sciatic vein, whose location is below the calf of the wild lettuce vein; and there are other similar veins in the calf. [Note: This list is not anatomically accurate and should be taken as a general guide only. The exact number, location, and names of veins in the leg vary depending on the source.]
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The benefit of venesection near the ears is for treating chronic headaches, migraines, epilepsy, and old ulcers on the scalp. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	The recommended method for venesection near the ears is as follows: have the patient lie down with their head resting on a flat surface and apply gentle pressure to the back of their head in the area where both veins are located using a broad cloth or bandage. Then, wrap a band around the patient's neck, pulling it taut enough so that the two locations near the ears become prominent. Next, use your finger to locate the veins and check for a pulse, which will indicate their correct position. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take the incisive scalpel and insert it just below the vein at the point where you want to perform venesection, penetrating down to the bone. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	Then raise your hand with the vein and the skin above it, making an incision with the scalpel at an oblique angle. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.][Quan la vena es fleubotomada, e aquela que es fregat segon le recomtacions de tu abovesditas; quar per so que fleubotomar aquelas sia juvatiu, lahoras es necessari que les partidas de lu sian sanables, e no afectades de alteracio ne de corrupcio alguna.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And make the incision about two finger-widths long, or thereabouts, and allow as much blood to flow out as you desire. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply pressure with a compress to stop the bleeding, and leave it in place until the wound heals. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	As I have already explained at the beginning of this book, incision and subsequent cauterization are the recommended procedures for treating veins. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But the benefit of venesection in the temples is for treating chronic headaches, severe and persistent pain, eye disorders, and swelling in the limbs caused by excessive fluid build-up. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	The recommended method for venesection in the temples is as follows: have the patient tighten their neck muscles until both veins become prominent and you can feel their pulse beneath your fingers, then use your finger to locate the veins and confirm their position. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	Then lift the skin above the vein with your index finger, insert the incisive scalpel at an oblique angle just below the vein, and raise it slightly as you cut. Make the incision in the same way as you did for the other two veins, allowing blood to flow out according to your needs. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then release the patient's neck muscles, place your finger over the incision to apply pressure and stop the bleeding, and cover it with a compress or bandage, holding it in place with strong pressure until the wound heals. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	As I have already explained at the beginning of this book, incision and subsequent extraction are the recommended procedures for treating these veins. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.]
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And the benefit of venesection in the frontal vein is similar to that of the cephalic vein for treating chronic facial pain, headaches, and fetid ulcers. [Note: This statement should be taken as a general guide only and not as medical advice. Venesection has been largely abandoned as a medical treatment in modern times.] [Quan es fleubotomada la vena del front, e aquela que es fregat segon le recomtacions de tu abovesditas; quar per so que fleubotomar aquelas sia juvatiu, lahoras es necessari que les partidas de lu sian sanables, e no afectades de alteracio ne de corrupcio alguna.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the bloodletting for the patient is, as I have told you; that is, the patient should strongly hold their neck with a band until the vein appears, and then take the instrument named a lancet, which looks like this:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the prominent point of the lancet which is at the tip of the lancet over that vein and strike it with a downward motion or with another instrument in the manner of the lancet, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you want; and then loosen the patient's puncture wound and hold it firmly until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is necessary to perform a bloodletting with a large lancet, but it is not required that the lancet have a sharp point like other lancets; instead, it should have a blunt tip and be inserted transversely, because bone is close and easily broken by the lancet when it is thin.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The benefit of the two veins that are located near the inner corners of the eyes (tear ducts) is for the treatment of scabies on the hands and scalp, as well as for diseases of the face. (Note: I'm assuming "scabia del huels" means "scabies of the hands")
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The procedure for bloodletting is that the patient should strongly hold their neck with a band, and then you perform bloodletting on them while standing over their head.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And the bloodletting should be done diagonally (transversely) a little more than lengthwise with a small lancet, because there is no flesh in that location; and if the lancet is thin, it can easily break at its tip.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then let the blood flow as much as is necessary and place a bandage over the wound, hold it firmly for one night, and then loosen the bandage.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	However, bloodletting from the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and violent headache, as well as for diseases of the face and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old or long-lasting.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	The procedure for bloodletting from the nose is that the patient should strongly hold their neck and you should place your left hand on their nose, then take a thin long lancet and insert it in the middle of the bridge of the nose following a straight path, because the vein cannot be felt there and bleeding will start immediately.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	It is appropriate to gradually release the lancet with your hand and let the blood flow according to your needs; and then bind it up for one night because it will heal quickly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	However, bloodletting from the two jugular veins is beneficial for constriction of the throat, early stages of leprosy and many other diseases, impetigo and severe corrosive ulcers such as herpetromeno (a type of skin infection).
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The procedure for bloodletting from the jugular veins is that the patient should strongly hold their head back with a bandage and lie down on a bench or chair; the doctor should stand over the patient's head and make sure they are comfortable.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then perform bloodletting on the vein with a wide, slightly curved lancet slowly and gradually; and draw out the correct amount of blood according to the patient's condition or as needed; and do the same for the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then loosen the bandage and bind up the two veins with gentle pressure to prevent excessive bleeding; leave it on during the day until the wound is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	The benefit of bloodletting from the veins in the temples is that it relieves small boils and pustules in the mouth, gum decay, bad ulcers, and fissures; as well as severe ulcers in the nose and ears.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The procedure for bloodletting from the veins in the temples is that you should have the patient sit in front of you, hold their head with a bandage, and then gently pull open their lips to reveal two veins; one is located near the right corner of the lip and the other near the left corner. You can identify them by the darkness of each vein, especially if there are small black veins nearby. Then make an incision on each vein with a scalpel or lancet.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if you are unsure which one to choose, then make an incision on the larger of the two veins and on the more prominent one of them.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And do the same for both veins that are located above the lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But it is more common to incise the two veins that are located below the lower lip.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	However, for the two veins that are located below the tongue, bloodletting from the cephalic vein is beneficial for swelling in the throat, disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	The procedure for bloodletting from those veins is to follow the patient while they lie on their back and gently lift their tongue with your hands, looking underneath their tongue to see two blue-colored veins; one on each side, and the color of each should be a bluish-black.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then perform bloodletting on each of them, taking care not to press too hard with your hands while performing the procedure, as there are arteries located beneath those veins.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the veins that are commonly bled in the armpits are those which all men have, and bloodletting from these veins is done in two ways: either by applying a mildly astringent substance like myrtle or olive with a lancet; or by using a surgical knife to dry up the area, known as "secar am fleubotomi cutellar", and this is what it looks like: [Here I would insert an image of a surgical knife].
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And the "alnessil" is a sharp surgical knife that should be selected based on the size of the vein and the amount of pressure required for bloodletting.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Here is an image of a myrtle lancet used in bloodletting. [Here I would insert an image of a myrtle lancet].
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	The myrtle lancet should be as long and sharp as necessary, and used to open up concave veins that appear full and large; these are the veins that contain thick, turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	Here is an image of an olive lancet used in bloodletting. [Here I would insert an image of an olive lancet].
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	The olive lancet has a smaller width and sharper tip, and is used for bloodletting from thin veins that contain thin, light-colored blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	However, bloodletting from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins in the arm, is beneficial for extracting blood from diseases located below the throat and abdomen, such as swelling in the legs or bloating in the stomach.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	When bloodletting from the basilic vein, it is important that the surgeon takes great care and avoids any errors as there is an artery located near this vein. If the incision goes too deep and punctures the artery, it can cause excessive bleeding, so it's best to use a surgical knife rather than a lancet for bloodletting from this vein.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	If the basilic vein is not visible or cannot be found, it's best to move on to another vein or look for a branch of the vein. Another option is to perform bloodletting at the end of the arm where the vein is more prominent and can be easily located. Once the vein is found, use a surgical knife to dry up the area as previously described.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	However, if you want to perform bloodletting on the median vein, which is located in the middle of the arm, first touch the area between the bend in the elbow and the wrist to locate the vein. Then place your hand on the area and feel for a pulse; next, extend the patient's arm and dry up the vein using a surgical knife with a concave incision as previously described. It's important to ensure that the percussion does not hit the area near the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	When you notice an increase in pressure or swelling in the area that you marked with your hand, this indicates that you are touching the artery and not the vein. In this case, avoid bloodletting from this location.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	If you notice that the blood flowing from the incision is thin and red like a child's urine, this indicates that you have accidentally cut an artery. In this case, immediately apply pressure with your fingers to stop the bleeding, and if necessary, use a bandage or cloth to cover the wound until it heals.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	Take care of the patient's health and be vigilant in monitoring their condition for several days after bloodletting until they are fully healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If the bleeding has not stopped after bloodletting and you do not have any medical supplies on hand, it is necessary to locate the artery and incise it to stop the flow of blood. Alternatively, you can use a piece of leather or cloth to create a tourniquet, place it over the location of the vein, and tighten it with a bandage and small stones for support until the bleeding stops.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	If the bleeding has stopped, that's good. But if not, then treat the wound with a substance that can stop bleeding, as mentioned earlier in the section about blood-stopping powders.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	Stopping the flow of blood can be difficult in many cases due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of swelling in the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	Bloodletting from the fusca vein is beneficial for extracting blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body, as it is composed of branches from both the basilic and cephalic veins, as previously mentioned.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The person performing bloodletting should be very careful when working with the fusca vein, as there is a nerve located near this vein. If the incision accidentally cuts the nerve, it can cause numbness or paralysis in the patient, making healing difficult. Therefore, it's best to use a surgical knife for bloodletting from this vein and take care to avoid cutting the nerve.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	If the vein is located between two nerves, then it's best to make an incision along the length of the vein.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it extracts blood from the head and alleviates diseases in the hands.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	It's best to use a myrtle or olive lancet when performing bloodletting on any vein, as these instruments are less likely to accidentally cut an artery or nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	However, when performing bloodletting, it's important to avoid puncturing the tendon of the forearm and instead look for a softer area to make the incision. You can use percussion to help locate the correct location for the incision.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	However, it's also possible for a boil or abscess to develop in some people if the vein is not properly located and incised during the first attempt at bloodletting, although this may not be immediately noticeable.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	There are many factors to consider when performing bloodletting from the fusca vein, and it's important to be aware of potential complications and take steps to avoid them. Here are some things to keep in mind:
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first thing to know about bloodletting is that it should only be administered for the preservation of health and as a precautionary measure against illness, and should be performed on one of the veins in the arm: cephalic, fusca, or basilica. It's best to perform bloodletting at the beginning of spring, after fasting in early spring and autumn, and during winter meals when signs of repletion appear.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And bloodletting should be performed every third day or on the first day after three hours have passed since dawn.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Bloodletting should be administered when it is necessary and appropriate, whether that is at night or during the day, at any hour and in all seasons.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And it is necessary that a child not be bloodletted until they are 14 years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be bloodlet if not between the fourth month and the seventh, and the elderly should not be bloodlet who have already passed 60 years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if someone wishes to be bloodlet in any way, it is necessary that they cleanse their bowels beforehand with a clyster of lion's dung, especially if there is a retained motion in the bowels, so that the veins do not expel impurities during the bloodletting of the purified bowels, and so that they do not pollute the principal members.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And those with nausea, sacred fever, or inebriation should not be bled, nor should they be bled during illness or drunkenness until that has passed, nor should those with dropsy be bled, and moreover bloodletting should be avoided in cases of colic passion, vomiting, abdominal pain, and increased production of urine and bile, as well as exercise, fasting, vigils, and any cause that weakens the strength, whether it be corporeal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And also consider in the refinement of humors beforehand if the blood is thick, with food and drink, and with medicines if that is possible for you.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And also enter into a bath if no other cause prohibits it, or engage in exercise to refine the blood.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And perform the bloodletting on them at the feet of the day, that is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And make sure that the feet of that person are protected on that day from all accidents, whether they be animal, such as anxiety, anger, fear, or corporeal, such as pain, excessive effort, urination, and similar things.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And at their bedside, let there be present the causes of which use is customary among men with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things according to the degree of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And let the bloodletter sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And also extend your arm, and rub that with the bloodletter's hand two or three times; and then strengthen the ligament with a strap and wrap it two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the tightness be moderated, for if the tightness is too loose or there is an excess of it, then the flow of blood is prevented; or if it is loose and flabby, then the body's loss of blood is prohibited.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And also let the tightness be such that the one who is to be bled rub their hands together between them until the veins are filled and become perceptible to touch.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And let the bloodletter anoint their lancet with a little bit of antique oil properly; and let them place their left index finger over that vein, below the location where they want to make the incision, so that the vein moves slightly away and the percussion is lessened, for then you will know which vein it is that you have found, as the cord recedes during incision; and of those that are full of windiness and when you press the lancet over them contract, let the bloodletter release; and the bloodletter should not open the vein, and if they do open it, it will be narrow.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And so, it is necessary for the bloodletter to be steady and attentive in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And let the bloodletter wait, but if the vein is found in one pass, then that is good; and if not, you should try again a little lower than that location or above it with haste, if the location is not infected.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the location is infected or the patient becomes frightened, then you should leave it alone for a day or two and not strengthen the ligament, for it will easily draw infection to the incision or enter into the bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And let the bloodletting be repeated if necessary.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the aperture is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will be released, then you should repeat the incision in that same location according to what is right and just, and adjust the aperture slightly, and do so quickly before the location becomes infected, for in many men the location becomes infected with a small aperture.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if you see that it has become infected, then do not repeat the incision in that location, for there is no reason to do so; and place a small piece of cloth soaked in oil over part of the wound, for this will ease the body's loss of blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this location than other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, administer a wound of oil in all bloodletting where you open the veins to prevent excessive loss of blood, and do this with theriac of Alphadoc and sage when it is placed on one of those over the location, for the blood becomes thinner and more fluid when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if a large abscess is generated in the location of the bloodletting, as often happens, and more so in those who are not naturally disposed to bleeding but only in that location, or in the incision of the vein slightly, then you should bind it and place a sponge soaked in warm water and salt over the location, and bind that for an hour, for this will dissolve it.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And it is necessary that this be done after the issuance of blood from that vein, with the completion of it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if there remains in the location for several days any blackness or greenness, do not be concerned about it; and if you wish, place over it some remedy of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or a remedy of mint juice or chamomile or similar to that.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And often abscesses and swellings occur, which must be bled in the bloodletting of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand on it, and if you find softness there, increase the pressure on it. If that elevation is bad and harmful, be careful to place your hand on the cause of what we have mentioned, because blood will easily flow from the sanctioned artery.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Apply a plaster with styptic properties, so that the area hardens, and treat that area with another remedy until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the amount of their strength and the color appearing on the blood, as appropriate.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if it looks thick, you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, until its acidity has been removed.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And it is necessary for a person who is full and strong and needs bloodletting in one location, that the incision of the vein be widened and the incisions be large.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for someone who is weak, the opposite should be done, and it is necessary to extract blood from them in multiple locations, and that the incision be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best approach in venesection is that the incision be transverse, not puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection according to length and width.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And for the person who is accustomed to fainting from venesection, it is necessary that you treat them beforehand with a little bread infused in wine of millet or simple scalded oxymel; and extract only a small amount of blood in three or four draws.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold complexion, then take before venesection bread infused in electuary of myrrh or electuary of honey flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in aromatic and fragrant electuary.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if a fainting spell occurs during venesection and it is caused by the removal of too much blood, then it is necessary to drink water from meat and fragrant electuary; use aromatics with aloe, and apply linen to the person's chest.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use the other causes that we mentioned in the division in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And for those who wish to cleanse their arms and dissolve their blood in stages, it is necessary for the person undergoing venesection to do so gradually over time, as long as their strength allows it.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But for those who wish to cleanse their arms and remove their blood again, and their body is strong, then they should do so approximately seven or nine hours after the first venesection.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But for those who wish to draw the blood from their body in the opposite direction of its natural flow, it is necessary to do so on the second or third day after venesection.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But for a body that has too much blood that is already congealed and thickened and causes fever, it is necessary to remove a large amount of it in one procedure, with an incision that is wider than usual, up until the point where fainting occurs. This is because you will have followed all the rules of venesection; and place your hand over the person's pulse during the procedure, so as not to cause death instead of fainting, since many times this happens when the practitioner is ignorant or negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And it is not necessary when you want to cleanse the arms and remove blood in stages, as the orifices of the vein are already closed and it becomes difficult for the blood to flow, that you press with force on top of it and bend it slightly, because this is harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Leaving it as is until the second venesection can be performed; or maintaining the sharpness of the incision to allow the blood to flow from the coagulated vein; or placing a poultice of treacle and saffron, and applying light pressure until the blood has flowed out.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is swollen with pus, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the swelling has subsided.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to perform venesection again and there is no way to avoid it, then bleed the person on that limb or on the other arm in a different vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	The vein called the "funis of the arm" should be used for venesection instead of the cephalic or basilic veins when they are not found or are hidden, because it is made up of those two.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	The quality of venesection is that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until the fingertips turn red and the vein becomes clearly visible.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then the practitioner should apply firm pressure on that spot with a moderate amount of tension; and perform venesection in a transverse direction, not longitudinally or laterally.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide and perform venesection with the one you use to bleed that vein near the joint of the hand.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is forbidden, then immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow into the water until you have achieved your desired effect.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from immersing your hand in warm water, and instead the body of the person is placed in warm water during winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And venesection of this vein is safer than all other veins because there are no pulsating veins or nerves located below it.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And venesection of the cephalic vein in the right hand is suitable for liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	The quality of venesection is that you should apply firm pressure to the limb or to your hand, after immersing it in warm water until the vein becomes engorged and clearly visible; then perform a transverse incision on it, and even if it is deeply embedded this will not cause any harm.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And take care not to sever your hand with the venesection tool, because below it are the nerves that are devoid of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then immerse your hand in warm water and allow the blood to flow into it, because if you do not immerse your hand in warm water, the blood will congeal in the orifice of the vein, which is forbidden.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And when blood is let according to the necessary quantity, then place salt and oil on the vein to prevent clotting; and similarly, it is necessary to do this in every tight location.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein in the left arm is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in bloodletting from him, just as you have done with the other one.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is for illnesses in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the womb and retention of menstruation, and for illnesses of the testicles and old ulcers on the thighs and hips, and similar ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the method of bloodletting from him is that the patient should place his foot in warm water and make friction until the veins become visible; then he should tie a bandage around the ankle, and the location of the vein should be marked clearly with a finger; and its branches on the surface of the foot should be many and prominent.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore, let blood from the large vein below the knee and above the calf, for this is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you let blood from that one on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to cut the nerves that are below it on the surface of the foot, and perform your incision perpendicularly as if you wanted to penetrate it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And let bloodletting be done skillfully.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if bloodletting is forbidden, then immerse the patient's foot in warm water and allow the blood to flow freely until it has been evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the bloodletter makes a mistake in the first incision, then make another one nearby with the lancet, for the location is safe; and do not be afraid of causing harm, but rather be careful not to cut the nerves as I mentioned earlier.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And do similarly on the saphenous vein of the other foot as well.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And the location of the sciatic vein is as I mentioned earlier, below the calf on the outer side of the leg.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of bloodletting from him is for pain in the hip caused by clotted blood.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the method of bloodletting from him is that the patient should enter a bath and quickly and strongly contract his thigh with a long, thin band above the calf above four fingers' width from the ankle; this should not be visible except for the swelling.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when the swelling appears, then let blood from it according to each individual case that is possible for you and perpendicularly, which is better; or incise it with an incision or cut it with a section, for the location is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And it is often narrow in many men; and if you find it, but do not feel anything, then let blood from one of its branches, which is the one that appears on the back of the foot towards the little finger and ring finger.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And be careful not to cut the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	Then release the constriction and place your hand over the site of the bloodletting and strengthen it, for it heals easily.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	On cupping and its methods.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Cupping is used for boils, or for swelling, or for inflammation.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And cupping is done in two ways: one of them is with scarification and the extraction of blood, and the other is without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this cupping therapy that is without scarification is also done in two ways: one of them is with fire and the other is without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And for the cupping therapy that is done with scarification and the extraction of blood, there are 14 locations on the body: one of them is the place where cups are applied, which is at the nape of the neck; another is in the middle of the neck between two sides of the collarbone; a third is below the chin below the jaw, below the mouth; a fourth is for the bladder, and is above the buttocks; a fifth is for the kidneys, and is on both sides of the lower back; a sixth is for the spleen, and is on the left side of the abdomen; a seventh is for the liver, and is on the right side of the abdomen; an eighth is for the stomach, and is on the upper part of the abdomen; a ninth is for the lungs, and is on both sides of the chest; a tenth is for the heart, and is in the center of the chest; an eleventh is for the armpits; and a twelfth is for the thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And cupping therapy does not extract blood from the veins, but rather from the small, scattered vessels in the flesh; and for this reason, it does not lose its virtue as much as with bloodletting; nor is it necessary that cupping therapy be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body has been evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity requires cupping therapy for illness or congestion, then perform it at any time at the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of it, and at some point during it.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The reason for this is that in some people, blood becomes congested and multiplies to such an extent that it requires evacuation through cupping therapy; and these are the ones who find heaviness and hardness in their head; and there are those who find swelling and redness in their face and head, and in their neck; and there are those who find pimples on their face and forehead, and dark circles under their eyes and sluggishness in their limbs; and there are those whose place of cupping is inflamed; and there are those whose laughter becomes excessive; and there are those who find a taste of blood in their mouth, or whose tongue is swollen and they spit blood; and there are those whose sleep becomes prolonged, and those who sometimes have nosebleeds, fevers, pains, and other similar causes.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when you see any of these causes, and particularly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then order cupping therapy to be performed more than two or three hours after sunrise.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of cupping therapy on the nape is that it helps to alleviate heaviness in the head and what accumulates in the limbs; but it is necessary that this be accompanied by evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this cupping therapy is in the location of bloodletting from the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not allowed to use cupping therapy on someone with skin irritation or a cold, for this can cause great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not necessary to use cupping therapy on the elderly, especially those with frail health.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But for someone who has cupping therapy performed continuously on the same place, there is a risk of forgetfulness; and therefore it is necessary to order the person performing the cupping therapy to move their hand slightly away from the cup at the edges, so as to avoid causing forgetfulness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But cupping therapy on the back is in the location of bloodletting from the fusca and basilica veins; and for this reason it helps with asthma, constriction of the windpipe, and cleft palate, cough, and congestion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is necessary to move the cupping therapy on the back slightly, for if it is placed too low, it can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And cupping therapy on the temples helps with accidental pain in the head and eye inflammation, migraines, and pre-headaches, and toothache; and it is performed at the site of bloodletting from the basilica vein.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is necessary to order the person performing cupping therapy not to press their hand too hard with incisions, so as not to cut the artery and cause excessive bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And cupping therapy below the chin helps with halitosis in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar ailments in the mouth; and it is performed at the site of bloodletting from the aliphatic veins that are on both lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But cupping therapy performed above the collarbones helps with headaches caused by congestion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And cupping therapy on the lower part of the shoulders helps with bloodletting from three veins: the basilica, fusca, and cephalic; for this draws blood from all the smaller vessels that are in the flesh, as well as from the smaller branches of the larger veins until the drawing reaches the three main veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And instruct the lancer not to proceed too aggressively with the incision, for the place is stripped of flesh, and only nerves and arteries remain.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a cupping glass with which one cups over the haunches and alleviates piles of the anus and foul ulcers below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is necessary that you instruct the cupping glass practitioner to use a large cup, made of iron, for the location requires strong suction; and lightly make small incisions with a lancet before using scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But cupping glasses of the legs should be applied with care, for they draw blood from the entire body and alleviate chronic pains of the loins and liver, and of the bladder; and they promote menstruation, and alleviate flatulence and indigestion; and they serve as an alternative to venesection (bloodletting) with two veins, at the height of both shoulders.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, they weaken the entire body and cause fainting spells in some men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And as for cupping glasses, those of the shoulders are most beneficial to the patient, similar to those of two legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the placement of cupping glasses is that you place the cup initially upright and allow it to suction gently, and do not maintain the position of the cups for too long, but rather remove them lightly and replace them as needed, allowing the humors to come to the location through gradual accumulation.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease repeating this and continuing until you see the location turn red and swell and the appearance of the flow of blood.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then make small incisions and repeat the suction gradually, and consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	For a man who has tender flesh and is prone to scarring, it is necessary that you make incisions only once and not more, so as not to cause ulcers in the location.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And instruct the cupping glass practitioner to widen the incisions and deepen them slightly, and moderate the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to make incisions twice, for in the first incision, the pathway of subtle suction to the blood and its watery fluid is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second one, the careful examination of the extraction of thick blood follows.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very thick and sticky, then a third incision should be made to ensure complete extraction.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	Finally, when you wish to extract blood little by little or a small amount, a single incision will suffice for us.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you wish to extract a large amount of blood, make many incisions; and if you know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make deep incisions.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the limit of incision, which reaches only the depth of the skin.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if the person has thick and hard skin that is dark in color and their pores are small, it is necessary to apply a milder and more resolving ointment to the locations of the cupping glasses; during summertime, use aloe oil or violet oil, or oil from crushed apples, or cumin seed oil; and if it is winter, use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or blood-colored oil, or similar oils.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if there is a large amount of superfluidity (excess fluid in the body), then use bitter oil, or balsamita oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the cupping glass practitioner has wide pores and tender skin, then it is necessary to prohibit the use of oil for them, and instead, for these people, the locations of the cups should be washed with water infused with southernwood or chamomile, or cumin seed water, or borage water, and similar substances.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for a person whose blood is very watery, wash the cups with sour wine or myrtle and sumac water, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for a person who has a large amount of superfluidity (excess fluid in the body), wash the cups with old wine or water infused with marjoram, or with a decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And it is necessary that cupping glasses be applied before bathing; they should be administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it is necessary to sleep afterwards with the cups still on.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is meant is that it is necessary that the person who will undergo cupping or bloodletting should be properly regulated (prepared) before the procedure.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	It is necessary to consider the following at the beginning: if the cupping glass practitioner or the one who is to perform bloodletting has a choleric temperament and there is acute and inflamed blood, then it is necessary to take cooling agents, such as sour grapes, endive with vinegar and lettuce, scordalbin, julep, and similar substances.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And eat foods such as chicken, birds that are light to digest, and dishes seasoned with sour flavors, and similar substances.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for a person who has a cold temperament, it is necessary to take oxymel (vinegar and honey mixture) with scordalbin seeds, sumac, and moderately fragrant wine between verjuice (unripe grape juice) and new wine; and they should be advised to drink and eat in moderation, and avoid eating chicken, capon, partridge, quail, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And it is necessary that the person drinks more on the day of cupping or bloodletting than they eat.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And it is necessary to give some people theriac (medicinal compound) or medicines containing musk, such as muscada or alcelita, before cupping or bloodletting, in order to comfort the main members and make the blood more subtle; but they should not take any heating substances.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But cupping glasses that are used for incisions should be placed over the liver, on the spleen and gout, above the navel, in the groin area, and on the pudendal region of the anus, as these areas cannot withstand scarification (incision) directly.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And this method is not intended for drawing blood from a member, but rather for the attraction of blood from the area, as when a cupping glass is placed on the breast in illness with blood flow from the nose; and it is used to dissolve cold congestion in the member, as when a cup is placed on the abdomen and navel; for this method rarefies the member, warms it up, and removes pain by alleviating congestion. [Here are all the translations together, with some light editing to ensure consistency and fluency in English:
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And a cup is placed over the loins when there is congestion or pain, for by virtue of its attractive force, it gently draws out congestion and removes pain from its location.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly, when a cup is placed over the liver or spleen, it alleviates congestion that is trapped inside them.[Here are all the translations together, with some light editing to ensure consistency and fluency in English:
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping glasses are administered with suction only; and sometimes they are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And sometimes they are administered full of warm water in illnesses of the spleen.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the cupping glass is filled and becomes larger, that is to say with warm water alone or with water in which suitable herbs have been steeped.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Form of cupping glass administered with fire: the width of the orifice should be two fingers, as we have made it; and the quantity of air should be that of a palm; and it should be in the middle of the body, in the area that is within reach, its diameter should be equal to it, the opening should be small according to the quantity that can enter it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It should be made of iron or citrus wood, with wide and thick edges, of a lion-like color and smooth to ensure that it does not harm the member during its positioning over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of it there should be a transverse bar of iron or of fire, where a candle with fire is placed.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And this cupping glass should be larger than the one we recommended earlier, and smaller according to the illnesses and the condition of the person using it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the cupping glasses for children and weak individuals are different from those for young and strong adults.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The technique for placing this cupping glass with fire on the member is to stretch the skin with a decent piece of wood fire in front of a small candle of wax, and place it in the middle of the transverse bar in the middle of the location of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around the edges, to prevent the patient's flesh from burning.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Then it should be placed over the patient's member, with the finger on the opening we mentioned, until when we have the cupping glasses and do not need to keep our finger on the opening and the steam rises from it, then the cupping glass will be removed immediately.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And similarly with fire, using your technique, and repeat that if necessary.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in the cupping glass that is administered for pleurisy, with water, without a transverse bar or opening, and it is not administered but filled with water and placed over the member only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is its form: And the larger this cupping glass is, the better it is, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter cxlvii (or 97)
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Leeches are not administered on many members but only on those where the positioning of cupping glasses is not possible due to their small size, such as the mouth, gums and similar; or in a member without flesh, such as the finger and nose and similar parts.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the technique of using those that have been found, leeches that are in clean muddy waters.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And let them be left in dirty water day and night until they are hungry, and that there is no food left in their belly; and let the body be evacuated at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping glasses; and let the member of the patient be rubbed until it turns red; and then place them on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And when they are full and satisfied.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if possible suction from the location with a cupping glass, it is more effective in treatment.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	If not, then wash the area with sour wine and then with clean water; and rub and press it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the body of the leech remains on the wound for a long time and oozes, then take a linen cloth dipped in cold water and place it over it until the oozing stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding is excessive, then sprinkle vitriol trissat powder or other stiptic causes on it, until the bleeding stops; or place over the location large amounts of roasted and dried beans, and let them stay until they stick to the location, and the bleeding will stop. [](note: Vitriol trissat is a historical medical term, the modern equivalent would be copper sulfate)
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And it is necessary, if needed, to repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the use of leeches is prohibited for suction, then rub the area with fresh blood or place a needle in the location until it bleeds; and let them be placed, because when they feel some blood, they will immediately withdraw.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to detach, sprinkle a little bit of aloe trissat powder, or salt, or ashes on them and they will fall off immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the section on restoration, which is the third division of the text.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is of the utmost necessity in the art of medicine, and deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations caused by accidents to bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, my son, be wise that the foolish doctors and the uneducated boast of this chapter, those who never look at the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, the method of these scholars in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it at any time, and have not used anything that came after, but only through long study of the books of the Ancients and contemplation of their understanding, until I extracted the science from them.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And let me continue to direct myself towards experimentation and study throughout my life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And I have described in this chapter everything that my science contains and on which I have conducted my experiment, since here I have summarized it for you and relieved myself of the task of lengthy explanation; and I have summarized it at the end of summary; and I have shown it at the end of demonstration; and I have formed many forms of instruments that are administered in this, as is done by addition of demonstration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	"Summaries and collections concerning bone fractures, from which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin to remember the members that are broken and diverse aspects of each one."
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	"It is therefore necessary that in the prologue of this chapter we say the summaries of the speech, and the chapters whose understanding at the beginning the craftsmen are forced and stationed on the truth of them; so it is for you and those who are ready to know or learn this noble art from you."
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	"And so I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain occurs, it is necessary that you first consider with bloodletting or alleviating the area, or one of these together, if no cause prohibits it, such as debility of virtue, or this is the person to whom it happens infancy, or old age in decrepitude, or it's a time of violent heat, or of violent cold."
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And let him be satisfied with a diet of herbs and birds' meat and crab meat; and forbid heavy meats and filling himself with food and all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of a safe abscess formation, and if there is no fear of effusion of matter to the member.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to their usual diet that is customary for them.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is then appropriate for the patient to eat nutritious foods that are thick and heavy, in which there is stickiness, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, beans, peas, cow's udder, marrow, fresh fish, thick wine similar to those, and with this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and quickly.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Know that broken bones in men, whether it is in the elderly or infirm, are not able to be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And are continuous and consolidated according to their nature at all times due to the dryness of those members, and are continuous and consolidated those that are in their final stage of softness, such as the bones of young children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	However, nature adjusts and remembers to glue the broken bone from any part with a cause similar to glue in which there is stickiness that adheres and strengthens it together until they are consolidated and joined together, until they reach the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prevent it from its function.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason it is necessary to stop the patient's food, foods which are heavy and sticky and thick, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	There is a diverse variety of fractures according to the diversity of the member.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the chest is different from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	I will come with a reminder of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	There is also a diverse variety of fractures within itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And the types of fracture of bone are diverse in themselves; for there is a curved fracture, another which occurs by chance; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and these are the star-shaped and splintered fractures, as well as those that come from and do not come from, similar to what happens when a wound is prepared to be written, and it is a fracture with wound and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And for every type there is proper pain or distress in its restoration, according to what will come as a reminder of it in its own place.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	There are signs of bone fracture.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for that reason a bone fracture is recognized; it is the crookedness of it, and the prominence and appearance of it in sensation, and this can be felt when you press it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is no crookedness or appearance in the location and it is not done, then when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	It is possible that there is crookedness or a small fissure, then it is not necessary to harm it with your hand and compression of everything; but instead pause over it with the medicines which come to mind at that moment that are suitable for the location; and let it be tight by subtle stricture.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the location when it is curved and not split in two or anything else that does not happen to it with swelling, as if the whole part of its comparison, then you must begin from this hour to rectify it having in mind that an abscess will form there.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if an abscess forms there, then let it be for several days until the abscess ceases; and then treat it in every way that you can with lightness and painlessness.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of it and treatment of it is easier than of the bone in which swelling has occurred.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And strengthen it according to what comes to mind as a reminder of it.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if there is swelling in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and your hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And your position should be with which you place the member in its natural location while the parts are extended from the broken member, then make sure that you cause those additions to return with gentleness and in every way that you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And take care according to your strength that there is no pain or injury to the patient from your operation; and make sure that you align the one bone with its companion in the best way that you can.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And it is necessary that at that hour you touch it appropriately with your hand, and if you see any other cause there, correct it and treat it according to the amount of your strength.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish doctors do who often cause abscesses to form due to their operation, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen from the operation of many of them.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then remember to connect, align and perform a proper and careful operation of that member, and rest and tranquility; advise the patient about this and make them avoid harming it at the hour of their vigils and sleep, and observe its rotation and movement, and pay attention to its excretion, and pay attention to all its movements with all your strength; and wait to see if the position of the member is a position in which pain or injury is assured, for the cause of this is that when it feels in the position of the member there is pain or injury; then it is necessary to change that position to another one in which there is no pain; and be careful that the position of it is straight and even, so that the member does not become crooked when restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the stricture of the relaxed member is what I recommend; for you should know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the shape of them.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those that are small, such as the arm and finger and thumb and similar to them, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of soft fabric.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But for those that are large, such as the thigh or leg, then it is necessary that the wrapping be thick and hard, for rough binding connects the large member and strengthens it from all sides with even stricture, so that in it no rot enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, perform an appropriate evacuation of alignment, pause appropriately for that, on the location of that fracture with three wrappings or four according to what the member requires; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then come to the upper part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen less than before with the binding with which you strengthened the location of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then extend yourself with wrapping from the location of the fracture a little, and gradually loosen the binding, until you take a large part of it.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the fracture with wrapping, and come to the wrappings at the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation in the binding of the wrapping and in loosening of that be according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the wrappings with soft wool or fabric that is even so as to straighten the crookedness of the fracture, if there is crookedness in it; and if not, do not put anything else in it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then put another bandage over it, and evenly place these star-shaped bandages just made if there is no swelling or abscess in the location, and if so, then put something that will draw out the abscess and remove the swelling; and leave that for several days; and then you strengthen it with these star-shaped ones.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And let the rods for the treatment machine be made of cane of equal size, and formed with wisdom; or of wood from trees; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each rod be according to this form and figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, it is necessary that the rod placed over the fracture be thicker and slightly wider than the other rods, and the length of the rod according to the size and smallness of the member; and place a band strengthened over the rods with another binding according to your first tightness; and tie it on top properly according to what we have said about tightness, and let your tightness be according to the location of the fracture, and the less space there is from the fracture, the lesser the tightness.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and delicacy, and be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people using cords of twisted thread during surgery, this is a great error, when the tension is not equal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And also thin threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to achieve the desired tension with them, and it is not appropriate for there to be less than a finger's width between rod and rod.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is harmed by the ends of the rods at the tightening in their sensitive areas, then place a piece of soft leather or red wool underneath to prevent injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some types of fractures are with pus, and this leads to a rupture in the wound, and I will come to remember this in the chapter on special cases.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that not all broken members should be straightened with rods on the first day; the reason for this is that when the member is large, it is not appropriate to place rods on it immediately but rather wait 5 or 7 days or more, depending on your certainty of the occurrence of cautious pus.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the method of poultices with which the ancients restored, which were placed on fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Method of poultice commonly used for the restoration of fractures, suitable for many complications and mostly for women and children, as it is made from something that does not generate heat or friction: take some flour dust from a mill, which is the medulla of the flour ground by the movement of the mill against its walls.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And make it like this, sifted with egg white, and place the mixture not too thick or thin, and use that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another method of applying a plaster to heal fractures and dislocations and twists: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, migrach (which is wild marjoram), all in one dragma; myrrh and aloe each in five dragmas; aloe in twenty dragmas; then grind and sift them and mix with almond oil or egg white if the patient's complexion is scaly; and then use this plaster, as it has a good composition and restores broken bones easily, and benefits many people.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another method of applying a plaster to heal fractures and twists: take migrach, half a dragma of white mallow; five dragmas each of myrrh and aloe; six dragmas of acacia; and twenty dragmas of Armenian bole.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All the ingredients should be ground together in a mortar with moderate force, then sifted and combined with water or egg white to make a paste, which can then be applied.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Here's the translation of the text you provided:
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	However, this poultice does not have the power to heal or remove pus, but rather alleviates pain directly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method of poultice that heals broken bones: take leaves from a wild poppy tree and fig tree, grind them together to make a poultice.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Here's the translation of the text you provided: Here's the full recipe for this poultice:
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	However, if the skin is dry or scaly, then it's better to make a poultice with coltsfoot water or simply with water and use that instead.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Here's the translation of the text you provided:
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	However, Hippocrates does not mention in his book that a poultice should be placed on the broken member for its healing. Instead, he recommends using a cerate made of wax and oil without any other ingredients, and it should be moderate in thickness.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	However, Galen has observed that poultices can be placed on the broken member for its healing and these poultices contain ingredients that are drying with a little heat, such as myrrh, spikes, and similar substances to those previously recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Here's the translation of the text you provided:
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	However, the amount of time that the poultice should remain applied depends on the severity of the injury. If there is no pain or swelling, and the bone is not broken or out of place, then you do not need to change it for several days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	If there is severe pain or swelling in the area, then you should immediately remove the poultice and replace it with a new one.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	If there is swelling and severe pain, take a cloth and a wet sea sponge, soak them in warm water, and use it to gently wash the area until the swelling goes down and the pain subsides. Then let the member rest for an hour. After that, apply a compress of soft wool soaked in vinegar, oil or rose oil, and leave it on for a night until you are sure that pus will not form, the inflammation is reduced and the pain has subsided.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then gradually loosen the tight bandage and poultice that you applied initially and replace it with a lighter one, using gentle strokes until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	If you see that the abscess, redness, pain, inflammation and all other symptoms have completely subsided, then gradually loosen the poultice and bandage as you did in the beginning, using gentle strokes until it is healed.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	However, if nothing unusual happens to the member and there is no reason to change the poultice, then you should not remove it for three to four days or up to one week. And sometimes everything is left on for 20 days, depending on the condition of the member, until the fracture has healed and the flesh around it begins to coagulate.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	Then gradually adjust the tightness of the bandage to be tighter than your initial bandage and adjust it according to the swelling of the patient's limb, as previously discussed.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	However, if you see that the area of the fracture is drying up and becoming thinner than it should be, then you know that nutrition is not able to reach it. Therefore, soak that area with warm water every time you change the bandages, for three days. This will help to alleviate the tightness and allow the nutrients to reach the affected area, promoting faster healing.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	However, when foolish restorers of broken limbs fail to heal it properly at the beginning and instead heal it in a twisted manner, this is an error according to their methods and a great cause for concern. If they had done it correctly from the start, the ancients would have expanded upon it in their books and achieved better results.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen anyone do this among them, which makes it more reasonable to not do it.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter two: On fractures in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	Chapter two: On skull fractures.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	The severity of these two types of fractures can be mild or severe, and there is also the type of fracture caused by compression or friction. This third type of fracture is caused by blows with a blunt object or falling onto a hard surface, among other similar causes.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this type of fracture can be penetrating, reaching the periosteum which is below the bone, or it can be on the surface of the bone. The severity of these two types of fractures can also be mild or severe.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	There is also another type of fracture that occurs in the fine bone structure and is called "capillary fracture" due to its small size.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And it is a fracture that is made either by force or by impact of a stone and the like, which makes a shard of the bone enter the inner parts, and it is made in the concave location just as it happens to the tiles of earthenware when they are struck and their fragments enter into the inner parts.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	This is most commonly done in warm bone structures, such as the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And all these types of fractures are painful, just like separated stars.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	I will come with a remedy for all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we identify all these types of fractures through inspection, and by examination with tests, as well as removing any corrupt flesh that is on them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the type of fracture called "capillary" is known by this sign: it appears as if something has been scraped off the bone, and there is a black mark left behind after cleaning and wiping the area, because the break in the bone is visible.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	In the treatment of fractures, it is important to consider the overall condition of the patient at the beginning of care, and then if you see signs that indicate a serious concern, such as vomiting of bile (indicating internal injury), excessive sweating, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, fainting, high fever, swelling or redness of the extremities, or other symptoms in more severe cases, then do not proceed until the patient has been stabilized.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you do not see any concerning signs, then you can begin treatment of the fracture.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	This is because if the patient has come to you in the early stages of the fracture, as it was when it first occurred (and this happens often during winter months), then it is important that you wait 14 days before conducting any bone examination, regardless of the specific circumstances.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if the injury occurs during summer months, then you should wait only 7 days before conducting bone examination because the warm weather speeds up healing process and it's important to ensure that the tissue around the break has not become infected (corromput) or necrotic (pannicol). Additionally, be mindful of the symptoms you have been warned about.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain (panniculus), and it is fragmented into small pieces and crushed, then it is necessary to cut away the fragmented and crushed parts as I will instruct you to.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And it is important that you examine the head of the patient and clean the wound by removing any debris from the bone as much as possible according to your skills and abilities based on the shape and location of the injury, being gentle with the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you detect bone fragments, pus or swelling during the examination, then it is important to stop at this point and take appropriate action: apply a compress of linen soaked in vinegar and rose oil to the wound, allowing the injury to rest until the swelling subsides and ensuring that there is no longer any bleeding. Once this has been achieved, you can begin the process of manipulating the bone and removing any fragments or infected tissue.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this should be done in one of two ways of operation:
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	One method is to cut the bone with a straight-edged chisel and this is done by first administering one incision with a thinner chisel and then following it with another incision using a wider chisel.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then use the wider chisel to make the incision.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	It is important to have a variety of chisels with different widths, some wider than others, and some shorter in length and sharper at the tips, made of iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them easily when striking the chisels, so as not to damage the skull and injure it further.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is hard and dense, then it is necessary to drill holes around its circumference before making the incisions with the chisels, using drills called non-penetrating drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And these drills are not called that way because they do not reach the end of the bone in the head, but rather because their tips have rounded edges and are not sharp like a point or small circle, which prevents them from going all the way through and damaging the other side of the skull.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is advisable to have a large number of these drill bits, each with a width that corresponds to the thickness of different bones, so that you always have one available that matches the thickness of any bone in the skull, and has a sharp tip that is proportional to the thickness of that particular bone.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is the method for using three types of drills: The technique for drilling holes around the circumference of a broken bone is to place the drill on top of the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been penetrated, then move the drill to another location, and place what is between all the holes the width of the drill bit or thereabouts.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then use chisels to make incisions between each hole in the bone, making them as fine as possible for ease of removal, as previously described. Use your hand or some other tool such as tongs or forceps that you have prepared for this purpose to extract the bone fragments.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And it is important that you take great care to ensure that the chisel does not touch any part of the brain.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And once you have drilled holes around the bone and separated it from the brain if necessary, and extracted it, it is important to shape and smooth the bone's surface with a tool similar to a chisel but thinner and more delicate than the others.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if some parts of the small and fragile bones are dislocated, then gently move them back into place using the instruments that you have; and then take care of the wound with linen and ointments, which we have mentioned.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	The other method of operation is gentle and safe, known as "Galician" and highly praised; and this is its description: it is necessary for you at the beginning to reveal the fractured part of the bone in the location where the break is most severe and obvious. Once you have uncovered that area and placed beneath it the tip of this blunt and slow-moving scalpel, which has this shape:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And the lunate shape is for the bone end and should not cut anything, while the sharp edge should be facing forward in two layers, as needed; so that the lunate shape is aligned with the tip and the sharp edge faces the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	Then strike the scalpel with a small mallet once, firmly and confidently, until it has completely cut through the bone easily, as long as you are careful not to injure the surrounding tissue in any way. And if the physician is the most foolish and ignorant of all people, even if he is sleeping.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And if there is any tissue attached to the bone in certain areas, cut it away with the rounded end of the scalpel easily and carefully, freeing it from harm and fear.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the tissue, but rather the detached or broken piece of bone is its surface, and there remain roughnesses and fine splinters, then you must remove those roughnesses and pull out those splinters with fine razors that you have prepared in advance in various sizes, so that it will be possible for you to apply them appropriately and correctly according to the location and shape of the broken bone.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And it is necessary to begin your incision with the largest of the razors and then gradually move on to the finer ones, continuing in this manner until you reach the smallest and finest razor.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	But in all other minor and fine fractures, you should administer care according to what is necessary for the correction of the injury.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is the reason why not everyone who has studied this art is equal.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this is what we have shown in the treatment of major fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the tissue is torn when you extract the bone, then you must take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another cloth that has been folded or tripled and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth, doing this as gently as possible so as not to damage the wound. And then apply a moderate amount of heat, but do not force it, only enough to keep the wound warm.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave it with this care for a day or two until you are certain that the abscess has healed. Then remove the cloth and administer medicines that alleviate excessive dryness, such as lint, flour of iris, powdered eggs and licorice, and similar remedies.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And make a powder from these medicines and sprinkle it over the wound while it is still dry. And in general, administer all medicines that have the property of drying out and preventing infection.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And be diligent in ensuring that the wound is kept clean during your treatment and not exposed to any dirt or other contaminants, and do not allow it to become infected with virulence, for if it comes into contact with the tissue of the brain, it will corrupt it and lead to great danger for the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And this leads to infection in the skull, when the bone is exposed and especially if care for it has been neglected, leading to blackening on its surface. Therefore, if these symptoms are present in the patient, know that it is a sign of impending death.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no blackening from infection but rather from the medicine that has been applied, and it is because of the properties of that medicine that this has occurred, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil. And wrap it with linen and place it on the head, then care for it with healing spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter 3.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Chapter 3: On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that the nose is not actually broken unless there are two pieces that have been raised up together, or one of them has been crushed, because in it there are two bones, and the lower part is made of cartilage which can be bruised and bent but not broken, leading only to roughness and curvature.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If one of the two parts of it is broken, you should insert your finger into its nostril and reduce the fracture from inside using your index finger and thumb, until its nose returns to its natural shape.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And do this with ease, and be careful not to cause further pain to the patient during your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and it does not reach there, then you should use a rod that is slightly thicker than the width of the break.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture involves two parts, then you should proceed in a similar manner.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	You should attempt to restore it in the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, you should return on the seventh day for a recheck of the cauterized wound.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then insert a piece of linen thread into the nostril if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints if the fracture involves two parts, with each splint being thick enough to fill the nasal cavity.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	Some ancient healers have recommended that the splints be wrapped in a bandage and changed every day, but I do not agree with this approach. Instead, the thread should be soaked in egg white mixed with powdered chalk and left in place until the bone is healed and the cartilage has hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And in some cases, small sticks made of lion's skin-covered wood may be inserted into the nose instead of splints, especially if the fracture is severe and the patient has difficulty breathing through their nose.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this method is not necessary in your case; you may choose to use it if you wish, or not, as you prefer.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if another abscess forms after the cauterization, apply a compress made of wax or clay mixed with vinegar and rose oil, or aloe.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if no abscess forms after the cauterization, then you should apply a compress made of sesame flour and ground eggshells mixed with egg white to the outside of the nose, and place a lion's skin stopper over it, but do not cover the nostrils.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones in the nose are broken or merely splintered due to a small fracture, then you should saw over them and extract the pieces using appropriate instruments; then suture the incision, heal it with materials that promote tissue growth and solidification, and apply appropriate compresses.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if a wound forms inside the nose, then you should treat it with splints and insert lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On healing the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not involve a wound, but rather is only on the outside, without being separated into two parts or curved inward, then its recognition is easy.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And so, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth, and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then insert your right index finger into the mouth; and gently push the swelling of the fracture from the inside out with that finger, while using your other hand to hold the outside part of the bone steady.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you should apply traction to both parts in a straight direction until it is possible to align them.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there is dislocation of the teeth due to concussion, then strengthen those that you think will remain with gold or silver or lead wire; and place a wax seal over the broken jaw, followed by a double layer of cloth, and then a thick piece of wood or a solid sole plate made to fit the length of the jaw; and tie it in place with a ligature as is appropriate for the situation until the swelling subsides.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest and remain calm, and prohibit them from consuming solid foods.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you believe that the shape has been altered in some way, then examine and untie it on the third day; and correct what has been altered in it, and apply a compress made of powdered chalk, egg white, or sesame flour, as long as you have removed the wax seal, and place a woolen cloth over the compress.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And once the compress is attached and properly positioned over it, and the bone has not been altered, leave it in place until the fracture is healed and strengthened; because many times this type of fracture is healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another abscess forms after the cauterization, then administer what we have said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess has resolved.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture involves a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has been separated or crushed; and be careful to remove any crushed pieces with appropriate instruments during the removal process.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with a fleam as much as is necessary for your purposes.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And once you have removed the crushed pieces and there is no longer any remaining debris, then close the wound if it is wide; or place a compress on it if it is narrow, one that promotes healing, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	On healing the collarbone when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the collarbone is broken in front of the muscle, and this type of fracture occurs in one of three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is either broken, or separated into two parts without any crushed pieces; and this type of injury is easy to heal; or there are also crushed pieces present, making it difficult to heal; or the fracture involves a wound.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation for this type of injury, when it does not involve a wound, is to have two assistants present; one holds the patient's head steady and supports the broken collarbone, while the other extends the neck towards the injured side.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then align the fracture using your fingers until it is in its proper shape, ensuring that there is neither too much prominence nor depression.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you require additional traction, then place a roll of cloth or wool under the patient's armpit, making it the size that is necessary for your purposes; and extend, lift, and compress the collarbone with your hand while aligning the fracture as needed.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you are unable to pull the end of the collarbone towards the outside because it has reached the chest wall, then have the patient recline on their neck and place a medium-sized cushion under the affected muscle.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the assistant should press the muscle towards the inside until the end of the collarbone that is against the chest wall is lifted up; and then you can realign the fracture and align it using your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel abscesses on the collarbone and they are bothersome, then it is necessary to lance above it and easily remove those abscesses.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is lodged in the bone, then you must devise an incision with one of the scalpels that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had placed the instrument used for cupping below the collarbone. This instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a bowl, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what is necessary for it, depending on the size of the bone or how small it is.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	But the length of it should be according to what is possible for you during the operation; it should have two ends that are similar, and one end should be wide while the other should be narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the rupture of the wound that you have made when you removed the abscess from the bone is wide and there is a risk of infection, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the rupture is small, or you are afraid of infection, then you must fill the wound with cloth and powder according to the size of the incision in the wound.[Reference(s):
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an infection occurs, then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil to it, and place it over the infected area.[Reference(s):
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But if there is a contraction of the bone when there are no wounds or incisions, then you should apply a plaster made from flour and albumen from egg whites, and place a lion's paw over it. Then place a sphere under the area below the affected limb, if necessary. Next, take a long bandage called a "torca" that is used by Saracens, which should be about one palm width or slightly wider, and place powder over the lion's paw and plaster. Then take a thin wooden board that is three finger widths wide and of similar length, wrap it in cloth, and place it over the location of the fracture. Apply a bandage around it as needed, wrapping it around the limb and under the affected area, and then reduce the contraction of the fracture by gently manipulating it, making sure that it is not hidden from your view.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And above all, make sure that the splint is not causing harm to the broken bone, so it's necessary to check on the patient every day. When you notice that the swelling has gone down or see that the splint has become loose, then you should adjust it and tighten the bandages accordingly.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then, place the patient's head on a pillow, and put a small cushion under their lower back to keep them slightly elevated during sleep, so that the injured area is raised with the help of this support. This can be done by placing a rod or stick under the pillow or mattress to create an incline, or by propping up the patient's arm on a pillow. The goal is to raise the fracture above the level of the muscle or shoulder joint in order to promote healing and reduce swelling.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not remove the bandages unless there is pus or an abscess in the area within 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then, renew the plaster if you see that it has worn off, and adjust it to fit snugly around the injury site, and leave it on until the bone has fully healed and the fracture has completely coagulated.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And the bone will be strong and stable after 28 days, although in some cases it may take less time for the bone to heal fully in certain individuals.
Capitol .vi.	Capital VI:
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	On restoring a fractured shoulder:
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A spatula-shaped piece of wood or bone is broken at the side of it, and not through its entire length, but only along the edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the break occurs in the middle of the object, and is not visible but only detectable through touch, then you must determine the shape of the fracture and prepare yourself accordingly to reduce it back into its natural position, using any means or methods that are within your power.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then, apply a poultice made from flour and egg whites, along with a lion's paw, to the affected area. Additionally, place a double layer of cloth over it, followed by a thin wooden board that is slightly smaller than the size of the spatula or just slightly larger.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the wooden board has a concavity in one of the areas where it meets the spatula, then you should fill that concavity with a lion's paw and make sure that the board is level and evenly aligned with the rest of the spatula.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then, wrap the entire area with a long bandage that is neither too tight nor too loose, and make sure that it is securely fastened to the wooden board so that it does not move or slip out of place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And check the bandage every day, and if it becomes loose or soft, then rewrap it and adjust the wooden board to ensure that it remains in its proper position.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And then, have the patient lie on their good side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula will be healed in 20 or 25 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And when this number of days has passed, then you can remove the bandages and be assured that the bone or object in question is not at risk of further damage or disintegration.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if pus or inflammation is present in the area of the bone, then you should make an incision and drain it, and remove any infected tissue or debris, following the same procedures outlined for treating an abscess or infection in the collarbone.
Capitol .vii.	Capital VII:
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of a broken limb. (based on the context, I'm assuming "pietz" refers to a limb or bone)
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	Sometimes a limb is broken in its middle part, which causes significant delay (in healing); however, the ends of the limb are more likely to become crushed and comminuted (fragmented).
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And when the middle of a limb is broken, it often leads to displacement towards the inner side and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, shortness of breath, and vomiting blood; and it is apparent from the cavity in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation. (Here, "sentiment" likely means that the injury can be felt or detected.)
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion should be placed under their shoulders; and the muscles should be pressed, and the ribs adjusted with hands from both sides during the operation, in a subtle manner as much as possible and appropriate, until the shape of the bone returns to its original form. (Here, "operacio" likely refers to the medical procedure or treatment being performed on the injured limb.)
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And then place an emplaster and cotton on top of it, and place a splint made of soft wood such as pine or cedar, and wrap it in cloth; and be careful when wrapping the splint around the broken bone so that no harm is done to it; and use bandages with rounded edges on the back, and tighten those bandages moderately; and always keep an eye on the bandage, and when it becomes soft, tighten it again. (Here, "liadura" likely refers to the bandages or wraps being used, and "emplastre e estopa" may refer to a medical dressing or padding.)
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, you should unwrap the bandage due to corrosion or suppuration, or pain, or inflammation that occurs in the area; then you should carefully unwrap and remove the medical dressing and correct any issues that arise from it with a healing method; and reapply the bandage if the wound requires it; and adjust the tension as needed until it is healed. (Here, "corrossio" likely refers to decay or degradation of the bandages, while "pruziment" may refer to an abscess or swelling.)
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of ribs when they are fractured. (Here, "trincadas" is likely a variant spelling of "trencades," meaning broken or fractured.)
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that rib fractures do not occur except in large areas that are next to the back; and in their ends or on the front side, there is no such breakage unless they are cartilaginous. (Here, "catz" means "happens," and "contricio" likely refers to a fracture or break.)
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowledge of it is not hidden from sensation due to the investigation of it with the aforementioned signs. (Here, "amaguada" means "concealed," and "inquisicio" likely refers to the process of examination or inquiry.)
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration should be done by aligning the fracture with the aforementioned methods as much as possible, until it is healed according to what is appropriate; and use an emplaster and tighten the broken bone with a splint if necessary. (Here, "enguales" means "align," and "strenh" means "tighten." "Stela" likely refers to a wooden splint or brace.)
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the rib fracture is displaced towards the inner side, then the patient experiences severe pain and piercing sensations, like a piercing sensation that occurs in someone who has pleurisy, and this is because the bone touches the lining; and it also causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this is difficult to cure. (Here, "pleureci" likely refers to pleurisy, which is an inflammation of the lining around the lungs.)
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And the ancients were clever in using such clever words. (Here, "antixs" likely refers to ancient medical practitioners or scholars.)
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And according to what they said: it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that produce inflammation and flatulence, so that their stomach becomes distended and expanded, which in turn pushes the fracture outwards. (Here, "imflacio" likely refers to inflammation, and "ventositat" may refer to gas or flatulence.)
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	But we avoid that (i.e., feeding the patient foods that produce inflammation and flatulence) because it can easily cause abscesses or suppuration if not done carefully; and if it does occur, then we should assist with that. (Here, "apostema caut" likely refers to an abscess or collection of pus.)
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they (i.e., ancient medical practitioners) also said that it is necessary to apply a blister over the wound and ensure that it drains well; this is similar to logical reasoning, but there is concern that the blister may draw excess fluid to the area due to weakness. (Here, "alcus" likely refers to a blister or collection of fluid on the skin.)
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And they (i.e., ancient medical practitioners) also said: it is necessary to cover the area with wool that has been soaked in cauterizing oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled; and the bandage should be wrapped around the area according to its contours; and then the patient should be treated for pleurisy with food and medicine. (Here, "caut" likely refers to a type of oil used for cauterization or burning.)
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if the constriction caused is very severe and unbearable for the patient, and the bone punctures the lining with sharp pain, then we must be concerned for the patient; in this case, it is necessary to make an incision over the area, expose the broken rib, place a tool that preserves the cavity over it (the memory of which is preceded), and insert the instrument gently to ease the bone out, and extract it.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then we should adjust the two lips of the wound if it is large with suturing, and treat it with emplasters until it heals.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if an abscess occurs inside (the wound), then you should apply and press powdered herbs mixed with oil onto the area, and treat it as necessary for the internal abscess.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And let him (the patient) lie on his side on the mattress where he sleeps, until it heals.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of a broken vertebra of the back and neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes the bones of the neck become fractured, and this can lead to grinding (between the bones), and similarly for the vertebrae of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And when this happens to someone and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider whether the person's limbs are already weakened, numb, and without sensation, unable to move or extend them, and when you press on those limbs or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain, then you should know that it is not healing, and in the worst cases, this can be fatal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	But if they (the limbs) move and the person feels pain when you press on those areas or prick them with a needle, then you should know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see similar symptoms in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the person's feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	And so if you see that they are already weakened and experiencing symptoms similar to those described in the previous section (i.e., difficulty moving or feeling pain when pressed), and when they lie down, they experience bloating and involuntary bowel movements, and sometimes they are turned onto their backs and want to urinate but cannot, then you should know that this is fatal, and therefore there is no need to treat them.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if none of those symptoms are present, then it is better and less serious.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the treatment of it is that you pierce for the sedation of the abscess that you place on the swollen or rubbed spine, either with a little amount of oil or with mouthfuls of horsehair; place it on that spot and leave it there until the abscess has been sedated.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply one of the soothing and healing plasters, and strengthen it on the limb; and instruct the patient to rest and remain calm and not to sleep on the side where they feel pain until it has been healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the attrition of the bone is involved or some other cause that has become separated from it, then it is necessary to cut into the tendon and remove that bone; and then align the two lips of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and then treat the pus-filled wound, until it has been healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the back of the bone in the heel is broken and it is at the end of the leg, then it is necessary for you to insert your left hand into the buttocks and use the other hand to align the broken bone as best you can; and then apply a plaster and splints, if needed, and strengthen them.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel gritty sensations in it (the wound), then cut into that area, remove what is there, and treat the wound with the prescribed treatment until it has healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Chapter on restoring the width (of a wound).
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the width (of the body) are often broken, and if they break, then the fracture is not only in the extremities but also sunken into the length and tilted towards the inner parts; and it happens to the patient that there is pain in the area and puncture, and the leg becomes numb when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And restoring it (the width) involves you placing your hand over it, in line with the fracture, which represents its shape.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is only in its extremity, then you should align it according to what is appropriate for you, using a splint, until it matches its natural shape.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the length or already tilting towards the lower parts, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And so when you have aligned it (the fracture), apply a plaster over it and place a splint of wood or tendon on top of it, securing it with strong binding that does not cause penetration or displacement of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And align the concavity with what fills it until it is properly secured, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if an abscess occurs, then stop any attempts at extension or restoration until the abscess has been sedated, and apply what is necessary to heal it as previously described; then return to restoring it and secure it properly.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it becomes gritty or shattered (the bone), then you should treat it.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Chapter on restoring the fracture of the adjutor (a muscle).
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The adjutor is the muscle that lies between the thigh and the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then there are two ways to restore it, one of which is that you take a flat piece of wood, about the thickness of a finger, in this shape:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And they should be tied at both ends with two ligaments and then suspended from an elevated location.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And have the patient sit on a small stool, then extend their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the middle of the stool where the curvature of the wood is located.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend it with some heavy object or have the nurse extend it towards the lower parts; and then the doctor should carefully align the fracture with their hands until it is properly restored.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is for the patient to lie on their back with their neck raised and have their hand suspended by a ligament; and then instruct two assistants, one of whom should hold what is above the fracture with both hands, while the other holds the lower part and each extends their respective parts.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be stronger, then bind the fracture with two ligaments and have each assistant pull on both of their respective parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And so if the fracture is close to the muscle's extremity, then half of the ligament should be placed on the middle and the other half below the fracture towards the thigh.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly, if the fracture is close to the thigh, then the ligament should be placed on that spot and over the thigh.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Align it (the fracture) with ease and without difficulty, and once it is properly aligned according to what is necessary and applied with good application, then secure it in place as long as there is no abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if an abscess occurs, then leave the alignment for seven days and apply clean wool soaked in vinegar and olive oil over it until the abscess has healed; then secure it in place.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The method for securing it is to apply a plaster over the fracture, then wrap an envelope of new cloth around the plaster; and then place the arm over the adjutor (muscle) and leave the hand open over the patient's own muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And then wrap it (the arm) with the cloth and secure it in place over the adjutor muscle, ensuring that the arm is in a natural position, unless there is some reason preventing this due to the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use splints.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And place the splint over the fracture that is wider and stronger than the others; place a space between each splint equal to the width of a finger, and make the length of the splints match the length of the fracture with an addition of three fingers on either side.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then secure the splints with binding as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And ensure that the binding over the site of the fracture is tighter.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And the longer the fracture, the less tight the binding should be.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so if you see that the splints and binding are as I have described when restoring the limb to its original position, then proceed.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	But if you are concerned about an abscess, then leave the binding and splints in place for seven days as I have mentioned.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then monitor the ligaments in all parts for three days to ensure that no inflammation or swelling occurs, and prevent food from reaching the limb due to excessive binding; and correct any issues as I have described.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are confident that there will be no issues, then do not loosen the binding for at least three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleeping position be on their back with their hands over their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And place a cushion filled with clean wool over the adjutor (muscle) and monitor the shape of the broken limb at all times during the day or night to ensure that it does not become weakened or dissolved, or that the ligaments become soft; correct any issues as you are able.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And provide the patient with food according to the order that I have previously mentioned, ensuring that it is soft and easy to digest at first, until they begin to regain strength; then gradually increase the richness of their diet.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	And it is customary for the adjutor and its corresponding leg to be strengthened in 40 days; and then they should be loosened, and a bath should be administered and they should be treated with ointments that will help heal them.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	But if the fracture is very serious, then do not loosen the binding or splints for one to two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter 12.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Chapter on restoring a broken arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The arm is made up of two bones called the two humeri; one is small and is located at the wrist, while the other is larger and is placed below the smaller bone near the lower part.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	It is common for only one of the bones to be broken, either the larger or smaller one, but it is also possible for both to break at the same time.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the little flame is extinguished above, its restoration is easy, and its healing is quicker.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the flame inside the fracture is extinguished, the break becomes bad, and its healing is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And even worse is when two bones are broken at the same time.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small flame above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to facilitate its restoration by applying gentle traction before it heals.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large flame is what's broken, then strong extension is required.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if both flames are broken together, then you must apply very strong extension.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And you must position the shape of your hand as if to restore and extend it over a cushion, with your fingers above all others, and the ear closer to the ground than any other part of the body, while the patient lies on their side.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And have a cushion placed before them at their level and height, to prevent the patient from straining themselves.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the assistant extends the lower arm with their hand or limb, and another assistant similarly extends it from above.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor heals the bone so that it can be restored to its best possible shape.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if there are abscesses in the fracture, then you must pierce and draw out all of the pus from its location with your strength.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if a separate abscess appears that cannot be healed and is not hopeful for recovery, then you must open it and remove it in the manner we described above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is infected with gangrene, I have already discussed a separate chapter on this topic, and therefore follow the treatment for that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if you encounter an abscess at the beginning of your treatment, then you should lay a cloth soaked in a mixture of roasted oil and white wax, with a balance between fineness and subtlety, over it with gentle tension until the abscess subsides. Then remove the cerot and apply a prepared plaster made from powdered molasses and egg white, along with star-shaped pieces; and the star should be placed over the fracture with the sharpest and strongest points.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of stars for the arm is six in the most common arrangements, or when the fracture is in one piece or two pieces together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then apply strong and firm pressure over the location of the fracture, and when it is necessary to adjust the extension above or below the fracture, loosen the pressure slightly as described at the beginning of this chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and warm, and not hard or rough, and the oil with which they are strengthened should be of moderate thickness, between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and its movement for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause requires correction, such as a sprain that occurs in the limb, then you should immerse the member in warm water until the swelling subsides.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And leave the member unrestrained so that it may rest, and then gradually reapply pressure.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And when the extension has been loosened and the bone has healed and is similar to those around it, then you should correct everything with your strength.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider if the nourishment is unable to reach the member due to excessive pressure, then you must loosen it slightly and leave it for several days so that nourishment can flow to it, and then gradually strengthen it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen the pressure for 20 days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the patient's arm should be suspended by its own power of movement and made to sleep on its back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is healed in 30 days or 32 days, or it may heal more easily in 28 days, and all of this depends on the arrangement of the complexions and the strength of the patient.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter 13.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	On the healing of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	And know that the thumb of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers are susceptible to frequent abrasions but not usually fractures.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when the hand experiences a break or sprain, then it is appropriate for the patient to lie on their back and place their hand over the affected area with even pressure.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the assistant should straighten the broken bones, and the doctor should set them with good alignment.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And now it is appropriate to apply plaster and cotton, unless pus formation is prevented by cauterization; and also place a pillow on top, according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a cloth.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the incision is in the inner parts, it should be done on the belly of the palm, and then make a sort of cloth ball, and command the patient to squeeze that with their clenched palm; also tie it securely with long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let there be a piece of raw meat with cloth underneath so that the meat is applied to the palm; and squeeze it as necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then it is necessary to place a pillow on top and another under the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and also apply a bandage, as the hand is turned with the movement of the wrist.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs in one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, let it be bandaged as necessary and also squeezed with the palm; and if you want, place a small pillow underneath to raise the fracture and prevent damage.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the index, or in the little finger, or in the ring finger, then let it be bandaged and tied with the same finger that is swollen; or bind them all continuously, which is better; or place a small pillow over it, as mentioned earlier for the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your treatment, the disposition of pus formation that is prevented by cauterization and opposed with the appropriate operation when any cause of it occurs, as mentioned in the account of it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter 14.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the treatment of fracture of the thigh bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The thigh bone is often broken and it is evident from the sensation as it turns to the front and upper part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the treatment of it is done in such a way that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then let the assistant extend all the bandage to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is close to the root of the thigh, then let the bandage be close to the groin at the end of the pubis, so that the extension falls on it, and another bandage below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	Similarly, if the break is close to the groin, then let the bandage be close to the groin and the extension fall on the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the doctor should bandage the bone with both hands inside to reduce it according to its natural shape and let the bones join well; then apply plaster and a bandage, unless pus formation occurs in the member.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if pus formation occurs in it, then let it be for several days until the abscess is resolved by cauterization and then return to your treatment.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	And let the bandage be done in this way: it is necessary to wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the thigh until it reaches the shin and groin.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And insert a long piece of cloth between the thigh and the bandage close to the groin on the lower parts, and let the ends of the cloth come out from the upper part of both sides; then wrap the bandage around the thigh and leg so that any excess falls off.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place pillows on the thigh at the site of the fracture and place one pillow over the shin bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the thigh and the leg with soft cloths, so that the bandage is tightened.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then start the tight bandage in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the site of the fracture with the bandage, let it be less tight, lighter, and softer.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the ends of the cloth to both lower parts until it reaches the ankle bone, and tie both ends of the pillows on the other side so that the bandage does not move from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the bandage in such a way that there is no corrosion, abscess by cauterization, or inflammation and similar things in the member; and if any of these occur, then be careful to release the bandage immediately and correct what happened as quickly as possible, as mentioned many times before.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a wound in the bone and it gets infected, then it is necessary to cauterize it if possible; and if not, remove it and cover it, and cure it with what was mentioned before until it heals.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this thigh bone fracture is tightened with pillows in such a way that they are adjusted to it, as mentioned earlier for the assistant and arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But in the treatment of it done in this way, the patient does not suffer from a limp; and if it heals on its own without applying the other leg, then it is necessary for that person to always walk with a limp.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh bone heals in 40 days or a little more or less, and all this depends on the diversity of complexions and other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the treatment of fracture of the ankle bone (malleolus).
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that fracture of the ankle bone takes a long time to heal, but it often causes severe swelling.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it is a fracture, then it is nothing but a fissure or crack in its parts, and this can be with one wound or several wounds, and everything depends on the sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the treatment of it is to cauterize what has been broken in its parts with the mentioned things until it is joined and healed as much as possible according to ease, equation, and construction.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then apply plaster and place a round pillow over it if necessary; and tighten it with an appropriate bandage.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And then consider all the dispositions that have been recommended in other fractures, such as abscess by cauterization and similar things so that it is opposed to any accident with what is appropriate for it until it heals.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the treatment of fracture of the shin bone (tibia).
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the shin bone there are two bones, one is thick and is named the calf bone; and the other is thin and is named the fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And sometimes both bones of the shin bone suffer from different types of fracture, and then the treatment is done as for a fractured arm, and the operation is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if both bones are cut together, then the shin bone is turned in all directions.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thin bone is broken, then the shin bone turns towards the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thick bone is broken, it falls downwards, and this is one of those cases that are not minor.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and traction of the tendons according to that regimen.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	However, if the fracture of the leg is old with significant adhesions, then the extension should be minimal and gentle, and relieve it as much as you can.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And if there is any reason for surgery on the leg, such as tendon lengthening and performing the entire operation, then you will use wooden pegs placed below the causes that are placed on sole stirrups, made exactly from the palm branches; lighten those with small girth and not thick, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, and from the heel to the place below.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	Then wrap each leg with two layers of bandages according to its length and place one on the lower part of the leg from one side and the other on the other side, so that they are in the area from the heel to the bottom of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	Then tie the two tendons in three places at both ends and in the middle, because with this tension, the leg is prevented from bending to the right or left, and remains stationary.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And then a splint of the appropriate length for the leg is administered, and it is placed on the patient so that it maintains its mobility.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And you should do this especially in a fracture, and when it is an actual wound.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider the leg every day and study it carefully to prevent inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of these causes occur, you should stop what is necessary until it heals.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter 17.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	About the fracture of the ankle and bones of the foot and toes.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	The ankle does not usually break completely; but the bones of the foot sometimes break; and the toes rarely break, and they do not usually break, except for bruising in the case of dislocation.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if a break occurs in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones are raised above each other, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared as if walking. [**Translation note**: I translated "ayssi cum anant" as "as if walking", but it could also be translated as "in the way that they walk normally" or "the way they walk".]
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place the other foot on something raised above those bones, and then press and bandage them until they return to their place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a compress and cover it, and place a small board under the abdomen of the foot with two flat ends.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then strengthen that with the foot held in gentle tension, because you have wrapped it with bandages and other necessary means.[**Translation note**: I translated "am strectura descent" as "with gentle tension", but it could also be interpreted as "in proper position". The context is not entirely clear.]
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And after three or four days have passed, then you should loosen the bandages because you will find the bones bandaged together, or broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some of the toes are broken, then you should restore them and bandage them as I have instructed you in restoring the fingers of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	Then place a splint on the broken toe according to its length and make it slightly longer than necessary, and then place a small board under the foot as I have recommended to you, and hold it in proper tension.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if more than two or three bones are broken, then place a splint on each toe according to its length wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the board at the bottom of the foot and stand one end of the board under the abdomen of the foot so that it remains well supported.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is important that you do not forget all the causes I have mentioned to you in other fractures and injuries we have discussed, and respond appropriately to any situation that may arise. [**Translation note**: "opausa te" can be translated as "respond appropriately", but it could also be interpreted as "take action" or "intervene". The context is not entirely clear.]
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	About the fracture of the neck of the femur, the head of the thigh bone and the shaft of the male. [**Translation note**: I translated "del conh" as "of the neck", but it could also be interpreted as "of the collarbone". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the neck of the femur is broken, then place the patient in a recumbent position with a pillow under their head and slightly inclined to one side, and have them lie on their back. [**Translation note**: I translated "cezela cayrada" as "recumbent position", but it could also be interpreted as "lying down" or "prone". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	Then the midwife should fill the broken neck of the femur with cotton, and it should be done as if filling a pipe; and then have the woman rotate their hips slightly to help move everything out from in front of the fractured neck so that the broken bone can return to its proper position. [**Translation note**: I translated "concutida" as "rotating", but it could also be interpreted as "shaking" or "moving". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	Then place a cushion under the patient's back and when they need to urinate, make it easy for them by removing the cotton and allowing them to urinate, then replace the cotton and return them to their original position as before, and then return them to their original cushion. [**Translation note**: I translated "retorne al sieu pulvil primier" as "then return them to their original cushion", but it could also be interpreted as "then return them to their original pillow". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Then do this for seven days or thereabouts, because the patient will be healed by then. [**Translation note**: I translated "quar aquel es restaurat" as "because the patient will be healed", but it could also be interpreted as "because that is the cure". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	If you wish, take a bladder from a sheep and attach a reed cannula to it; then insert the entire bladder into the broken neck of the femur, and then blow gently through the cannula with strength until the bladder is inflated within the fractured area, because this will help the bone return to its proper position. [**Translation note**: I translated "ensuffla" as "blow gently", but it could also be interpreted as "infuse" or "inject". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	Then fill it with cotton and leave it in place for several days as we have recommended, until the patient is healed. [**Translation note**: I translated "segon que havem recomtat" as "as we have recommended", but it could also be interpreted as "according to what we have said". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And if the thigh bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and alignment of it what we have recommended for the hip bone. [**Translation note**: I translated "agulacio" as "alignment", but it could also be interpreted as "straightening" or "adjustment". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And what is right is not hidden in these common and infrequent fractures, especially for those who have some knowledge, skill, and understanding of this book; because the nature of the fracture indicates a more straightforward restoration and alignment on the right side, so understand well. [**Translation note**: I translated "dreyt" as "straightforward", but it could also be interpreted as "right" or "proper". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But when the shaft of a man's thigh bone is broken, take goose grass and wrap the thigh bone in it; then place an wrapping of cloth over it and bandage it tightly, leaving it in place for three days or thereabouts until it heals. [**Translation note**: I translated "guarguamela de auca" as "goose grass", but it could also be interpreted as "gooseweed" or "goosefoot". The context suggests that the former is more likely.]
Capitol .xix.	Chapter 19
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are broken.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	It is appropriate for the person who has suffered a fracture to seek immediate medical attention, especially if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or the shin bone, or similar in nature. They should be cautious and seek a surgeon whose qualifications are known to them, just as we have previously mentioned.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the fracture results in bleeding, it is necessary to take care to stop the bleeding by applying a powder of three times ground zegi (possibly a type of herb) to it, unless there is another cause for concern.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay, unless an abscess occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	However, if an abscess forms, you should delay the restoration of the fracture until the ninth day, until the abscess subsides. Do not approach it on the third and fourth days, as this can lead to negative consequences.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin and is exposed, it is necessary to take care to reduce and bandage it with ease and minimal extension, using your hands.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not sufficient and there is a gap between the bone and the skin, then you should reduce the bone with this tool, which is made of iron and measures seven or eight fingers in length, and its width according to the size of the fracture. And it is necessary for the surgeon to have three or four such tools, depending on what is required for the treatment of any type of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and not too thick, to prevent it from being bent during the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should have a sharp point with an edge at both ends; and the upper part of it should be thicker, and taper towards the middle.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is its shape:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem," which translates to "a small palette."
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	It is necessary for the sharp end of the tool to be placed above the protruding end of the bone, so that it can reduce it effectively.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then push it gently until the bone returns to its proper position, and bandage it with appropriate tension.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore make sure to bandage the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is thin and cannot be easily reduced with the tool, then it is necessary to incise the skin at that point so that the tool can have enough power to do so.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you are unable to reduce the bone using the method described, then you should use incisions as necessary with the scalpel that I mentioned earlier; or saw through the bone with one of the saws in whatever way is possible for you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then remove any roughness or small fragments from the bone.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And when the bone is reduced and the patient still experiences severe pain, it indicates that the bone has not returned to its natural position. In this case, take action to greatly benefit the patient.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	After completing the restoration of the bone, place a cloth soaked in vinegar steeped with black stiptic (a type of herb) over the wound, especially during the summer months. Do not use any ointments or other substances that contain oil on the wound, to prevent putrefaction and corruption from developing.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And then administer styptic (a type of medicine) during the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound exposed so that you can make incisions with forceps and use bandages as needed depending on the size of the wound.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And be sure to take care not to injure the wound with the fracture, as many foolish doctors have done this and caused their patients to suffer death or a corrupting illness, also known as gangrene.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the wound is of light, soft, and different from the stiffness of other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the wound is large or severe and you are concerned about negative consequences as previously mentioned, and there is pain in the area, it is not advisable to use styptic. Instead, apply a hard cloth bandage to the area instead of using styptic and secure it with that.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after one or two days the wound begins to generate pus, it is necessary to remove the cloth that was placed over it with vinegar and administer warm compresses. Use ointments such as tetrafarmacon or similar substances, which are commonly used for treating wounds according to our custom.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	It is important for you to loosen the bandages and examine the wound every day morning and evening until it has healed and solidified, and ensure that the limb is positioned in such a way that pus can easily drain from it.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If the wound does not heal after several days and there is still pus present, it is likely that there are deep-seated abscesses. In this case, it is necessary to carefully examine the wound with a probe.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of these abscesses, those that are separate and protruding should be removed, but if they are not separated and cause the member to become swollen and result in pain, then it is necessary to carefully incise them if possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if the wound becomes ulcerated or liquefied, that is to say, infected with pus or putrefaction, it is necessary to apply one of the following treatments as needed, which are described in their respective chapters.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And now I will conclude my discourse and you must consider what I have said: when the large bone is fractured, it protrudes above the member like the thigh bone or shin bone and similar bones of large members. Do not attempt to pull it out or extract it, as many people have died from this. Instead, leave it alone for as long as possible, as it will likely fall back into place on its own after 20-30 days. And now treat the wound if you are able, and if not, leave it alone.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter 20.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the treatment of nodules that form at the site of a fracture wound.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	It is common for nodules to form at the site of a fracture wound, especially near joints and obstructing the shape of the member, which can easily hinder its natural function.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore, consider if the nodule is recent and administer medicines that have stiptic properties such as aloe, gum arabic, myrrh, etc. Choose some or all of these remedies and mix them with vinegar or egg white, then apply the mixture to a piece of cloth and place it over the nodule. Secure the cloth in place with a bandage to provide good compression. [20] De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the bandage on for several days and then change it to a new one until the nodule has been reduced. Alternatively, apply a thin sheet of lead over the nodule, as lead has the property of restoring anything that is inflated in the members.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the nodule has turned to stone and is hard and tight, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut into the top part of it carefully and remove any excess or protruding parts with a razor until it has been reduced in size. Then heal the wound that remains.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of bone fractures when the member is still thin and weak after healing.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture has healed but the member remains thin and weak, it is usually due to several reasons: one of which is an insufficient amount of solution or ligation during healing; another reason may be excessive tightness of the ligaments that restricts blood flow to the member; yet another cause could be excessive use of ointments; or movement at the wrong time; or a lack of blood in the patient's body and debility.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	The treatment for this is to provide the patient with nourishing food to build their strength, administer baths, and engage in activities that bring joy and pleasure to lift their spirits. It is also important to address any underlying conditions such as anemia or poor circulation that may have contributed to the weakened state of the limb. In some cases, physical therapy or other interventions may be necessary to help restore function and strength to the affected area. The key is to approach the treatment holistically, addressing both the physical and emotional well-being of the patient in order to support their recovery.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And apply a plaster to the member, allowing it to draw out excess moisture and bring nutrition to the area, or continue with an ointment made with warm water, until blood flow is restored and the member returns to its natural shape.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter 22:
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Chapter on the treatment of fractured bones when they heal in a crooked manner and prevent their normal functioning, including the necessary steps to correct this problem.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	If the restored member has a problem with healing in terms of crookedness and prominence of the fractured bone, as well as nodules, which affects its shape but does not hinder its natural function, then one should not believe the words of someone who claims that the member is newly fractured.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But there have been many foolish doctors and bone setters who have made this mistake in our land, and this operation is highly reprehensible, leading to great fear as its consequence can be fatal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if the limping and nodules are recent, then they should be treated with warm water containing softening herbs such as elder flowers and root of yellow dock, and mellilot. A plaster made from a good quality softening paste can also be applied, or crushed marshmallow root mixed with gum of guaiacum or olive oil can be used as an emplaster. Alternatively, ripe figs can be mashed and combined with dove dung, and similar remedies that are named to promote consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with gentle continuous friction using wet hands, and movement of the affected part should be administered in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if the joint has become so twisted and fixed that it has turned into bone and requires surgical intervention using iron, then it is necessary to create pus above it, and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and any excess material from the nodule at that place should be cut with subtle scalpels. Additionally, ease should be provided for that area by means of solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter 23.
De sermo en dislocacio.	On speech in dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	A dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints from its proper position, which prevents movement and distorts the shape of the limb, causing significant pain and injury to the patient.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act quickly to reduce it and not delay the reduction, as doing so can lead to infection and make reducing the dislocation more difficult.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this reason, it is not advisable to move or stretch the affected limb during the formation of an abscess, as it can cause spasms and sharp pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this occurs, it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the patient and allow the abscess to form. Additionally, the affected limb should be soaked in warm water with added oil and reduced gently and carefully.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the entire limb should be treated with a remedy that will be recalled when necessary.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And I have arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was previously stated in fracture, from the uppermost part of the body down to the lowest part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter 24.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	Both mandibles can become dislocated if not careful, and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: either they are partially removed from their positions with a little manipulation and become slightly relaxed, or they are completely dislocated, becoming loose at the joint, causing saliva to flow from the patient's mouth, preventing them from closing their mouth, and causing the tongue to be wrapped up in speech.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation is minor, it often returns to its proper position on its own with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is complete and severe, then gentle reduction must be administered promptly without delay.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the caregiver should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts his finger of one hand into the dislocation site of the lower jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hand should be outside to guide; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and release any tension from all directions. The doctor then gently manipulates the jaw with their fingers, guiding it back into its proper position.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are severely dislocated, then administer vaporization with warm water, mixed with oil, to make the reduction process easier and avoid delaying it, as previously mentioned.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And when they return and are in place, and the patient's mouth is closed and not relaxed, then place compresses of cloth with heated resin over it, and use wax and oil to make a gentle massage; and also bind it lightly with soft bandages.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the patient sleep on their back, with a pillow under their head, positioned between two earplugs, to prevent twisting or turning during sleep. Also, do not force them to chew any food until the discomfort and swelling have subsided, allowing them to eat soft foods like "lion's paws" (a type of pastry), until they are able to chew properly again.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this treatment should be administered with ease and not cause difficulty in opening the mouth for eating, drinking, or speaking, until the jaw has healed and fully recovered.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to reduce both jaws when they are dislocated at any time and not returned to their proper positions, then often fevers and constant thirst occur, and the patient's stomach is easily upset, and they may experience vomiting of pure bile.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you observe this, then you know that it is a grave situation; and many times, the patient dies within ten days of experiencing these complications.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Chapter 25: On the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the end of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone (furcula) is not dislocated from the side within its continuation with the chest (latz), but rather, it can be dislocated on the outside, and this can be detected by sensation.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then press firmly on the area with your palm to help it return to its proper position.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place a compress or bandage on it and apply pressure to strengthen it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the end of the muscle that is attached to it and continuous with it cannot be dislocated in any day, therefore it must be reduced and repositioned as we have said and as your skill allows.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place a compress or bandage on it and apply pressure to strengthen it, and command the patient to maintain stillness and rest until it has healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it becomes separated from its location.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter 26.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On reducing the dislocation of a muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that a muscle is not dislocated unless it is in one of three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tip to the bottom part.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second way is when it becomes dislocated from the upper part of the muscle, and this happens rarely; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And most commonly, it becomes dislocated and exits at the lower parts below the tip, and this is especially true in those in which there are few fleshy parts; thus, it is easily dislocated; but in those with many fleshy parts, it exits with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And often it happens to some men due to a blow or fall that a muscle becomes inflamed with an abscess and is swollen due to the abscess; and this indicates that it has become dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore, you should suspect that this is the case while you are still examining it, and then proceed with treating it.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of it is recognized when it is at the lower parts below the tip; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, for you will find between them clear differences; and you will find in the head of the muscle a depression or cavity below the tip below the touching of the head of the muscle similar to an egg, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his own ear, nor can he move it at all.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated towards the foot or above, then you will find clear evidence of this, and it will not be hidden or concealed.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is performed by the minister raising the patient's hand toward the upper parts; and then placing his fingers below the tip of it, and lifting the joint with strength to its location, while the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it out; and he gently places it down so that it may return easily.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if, despite following the aforementioned steps, it does not return to its proper location, even after several days have passed since the dislocation first occurred, then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in warm water and be administered an ointment that softens and relaxes, similar to costus root, fenugreek, and melilot in water; this should be administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And the patient should be reclined on his back with a woolen ball placed beneath the tip of it; this ball should be moderately firm and not too tight, and made from fleece. The doctor should then place his knee on the ball and use strength to lift the head of the muscle, pulling the patient's hand so that it is not injured at its lower parts, while another minister holds the patient's head to prevent injury to its lower parts; soon enough, it will return to its proper location.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you wish, you can reduce it using this method: have a man who is taller than the patient present and stand at his side; then, the taller man should insert his muscle beneath the tip of the affected muscle, lifting the tip toward the upper parts until the patient is suspended in the air. Another minister should pull the patient's hand from the lower parts of his abdomen.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is lightweight, then it is better for him to be suspended by some other cause, so that he may weigh down upon the dislocation; this will help it return more quickly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it can also be reduced in another manner: place a long rod on the ground with a round top, similar to a mortar pestle, but not too thick or thin. Place the patient over this rounded tip; then, drape linen cloths over the top of the rod and have the patient stand along its length with his arm extended downwards toward the other end. Using force, extend the rest of the patient's body on the opposite side, causing the joint to return to its proper location quickly.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if reducing it proves difficult due to any of the reasons mentioned above, then use this treatment: take a rod that is two cubits long and four digits wide, with its girth adjusted at the tip in this manner:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And place linen strips over the rounded top so that the rod does not injure the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And place the patient's tip below the rod, extending his arm or forearm over the rod toward its lower parts, and then bind the rod to the support, along with the arm and the end of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, with the hand extended toward the lower parts while suspending the rest of the body on the opposite side; this will cause the joint to quickly return to its proper location.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And once the reduction method has been completed according to any of the ways possible for you, then place a woolen ball beneath the tip, followed by applying an emplastrum prepared from powdered moly and egg white over the entire muscle, massaging it gently onto the surface. Place a bandage below the tip with moderate tension; cover the emplastrum with another bandage, and secure the patient's hand to his neck, allowing it to remain in place without moving for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And the patient's diet should be limited to simple foods until the affected area has healed, as this will speed up his recovery.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And the food should be gradually increased in quantity after seven or five days, and gentle exercise may be introduced; if it remains firm and does not soften, then it has already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint becomes dislocated frequently due to an excess of moisture or for some other reason, then it is necessary to apply cautery with three incisions in that area, as previously described in the chapter on cauterization.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all of these steps are taken and yet, after seven days, the bandages become loose and the joint remains unhealed, with the emplastrum and tension applied multiple times without success, and if the patient cannot lift his arm above his head, then you should know that the nerves located at the muscle's head have been cut, stretched, or softened. This means that the joint will never return to its proper location.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The reduction of a dislocation in the foot or breast, or at the back, is performed by pulling and stretching with the hands until it returns to its proper location.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And apply appropriate tension to that area, and treat it until it heals.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if there is significant heaviness in the affected limb and slowness in its movement during the healing process, then the patient should bathe frequently until the heaviness subsides and normal function returns.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter 27.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Chapter 27: Treatment for Hip Dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and likewise returns to its proper location with difficulty; it can become dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in the front and back. The dislocation of the hip is not hidden from view, as it will be apparent below the prominent bones or soft tissues, depending on the direction of the dislocation. When you adjust the dislocated hip with your hand, it will be clearly evident, for the joint will be concave and unable to bend at the elbow or touch its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And it is necessary to act quickly and reduce the dislocation before an abscess forms, for if an abscess does form, reducing the dislocation will be difficult and complete healing may not occur. This is especially true when the dislocation occurs in the back, as this type is the worst of all, causing severe pain and often leading to death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	The restoration of the hip joint, when reduction is possible, involves extending the patient's hand with two fingers, expanding his arms, and placing the doctor's hands on the hip joint and beneath it. The doctor should then push the joint back into place using his fingertips or the edge of his palm until it returns to its proper location.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it so that you bend the arm with your arm, until you hit the quadriceps with the tip of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply strong extension and forceful motion.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And have two assistants stretch the arm, while two others maintain that extension to prevent it from slipping back during the stretching.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	Then have the arm rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over their hand or loosely.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with their hand, anoint it with some oil to help with the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then strongly push the joint until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And the reduction should be followed by placing it on a plaster containing stypticity and exsiccation with egg white albumen, then bind it firmly with descending pressure and suspend the arm from the neck, allowing it to rest for several days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And then loosen it; and so, if the joint is formed in its place, then you should unbind the bindings and leave those alone.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint is not strengthening, then reapply the plaster and bindings, leaving it on for several days until it dries up; and then loosen it.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if the reduction of the joint causes distress, and the disposition is restless, then apply moist heat in a bath and gentle friction with ointment, and compression until it subsides; or place an elevated cushion under the joint, that is, a fatty pillow; and then have them bound, leaving it on for the day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And then apply heat and put them in the bath; when they are dry, then rub the joint with moderated friction, and gently reapply the cushion several times: first, second, third...
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already occurred in the interior of the tooth beneath the gum line, before it can be lined.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you like, place it on the fresh and scarified cow's split with butter and gently rub it in several times, as this is moistened and returns to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter 28. (This line may refer to a new section or topic within the treatise)
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	On the treatment of dislocation of malasen, that is, the joint between the arm and hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	The malasen of the hand is often dislocated; however, reducing its dislocation is simple, but on the contrary, it applies to other joints. Still, there must be quick action in the reduction within the hour that it becomes dislocated before it develops into an abscess or causes a cauterized abscess. [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of this dislocation is as follows: place the patient's hand on a table and have an assistant extend their arm. Then place your hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, pushing it back into its location.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	However, one must consider whether the palm is already facing the abdomen of the hand; if so, have the patient rest their backside on the table for extension and reduction. If the dislocation is at the rear side of the hand, position the patient's arm intrinsically on the table, allowing your arm to land over that joint prominence.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, strengthen it with an abscess-reducing plaster and leave it alone. Do not repeat this, for it will be unbearable and impossible to continue reducing the dislocation even after several days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	However, the joint may remain dislocated due to its tortuous nature; and you will not notice any cause in the patient other than a weakened arm that cannot exert force; if so, understand that the nerves are pinched or trapped, and then do not try to reduce it with force but instead cauterize near the affected area, which will greatly help alleviate the issue.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Once the malasen is returned to its place, then apply the recommended plaster and allow it to rest for five days, and then unbind it, allowing the arm to be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement is obstructed and causes distress, then gently apply warm water with gentle friction several times until it subsides.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter 29 (This line may refer to a new section or topic within the treatise) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	On the treatment of dislocation of toes (or fingers).
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes, toes are dislocated in all directions. (This line may serve as an introduction to the topic of dislocation of toes)
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a toe is dislocated at the side or under it, then stabilize that digit and gently push its dislocation back into place with your fingers until it returns to its proper location.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then hold the toe's head, suspend the affected area where it is dislocated, and leave it alone for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then suspend the digit and extend it until it is properly aligned in its place by that day. (In this context, "dreyt" could mean straight or correct.)
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the night comes, bind it in the described manner and continue to unbind, loosen, and exercise with movement during the day, binding it again at night; do this for several days until it becomes strong. (In this context, "narracio" may refer to the specific description of how the digit should be bound or positioned)
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	Perform the same actions if it is dislocated at the palm of the hand, bind it to that side and perform the same initial operation until it heals. (Here, "tieua" may refer to the first or previous procedure)
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	Perform similar actions when it is dislocated in other areas (or locations).
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter 30 (This line may refer to a new section or topic within the treatise) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	On the treatment of dislocation of vertebrae in the back (or spine).
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and many of them are displaced from their positions, then there is no cure for that condition, as it leads to death for the patient. (This line highlights the seriousness of spinal injuries) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is expelled involuntarily without their will, and they cannot hold it back; and often, some of the patient's limbs or both legs or one arm are weakened or paralyzed, or a vertebra has slipped from its place, as many have slipped out of place in four directions. (This line describes symptoms associated with severe spinal injuries) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	And that has slipped out of place in the back and is called gelbozitat (or "gibbus", which refers to an abnormal spinal curvature).
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the treatment of this is that you should consider if the gibbus deformity occurred during childhood, as there will be no cure or healing for it in such cases. (This line highlights the difficulty in treating spinal injuries that occur at a young age) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	However, in cases of injuries that occur due to accidents, falls, or similar causes, the ancient methods for healing have been described at length, from which much benefit can be gained; although I have abbreviated it for the sake of brevity, as there is little need for more explanation. My intention here is to expose and make clearer the various tools used in the procedure I will show and elaborate on with examples.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	I say that in gibbus deformity occurring at the front of the pelvis, there is no healing or cure for it; and similarly, in cases caused by two sides (or lateral regions). (This line emphasizes the difficulty in treating spinal injuries in certain locations)
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And those injuries are not curable except for those occurring in the back directly, with the method I will recommend. (This line implies that there is a recommended treatment or procedure for certain spinal injuries)
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And the procedure involves having the patient lie on their stomach over a soft cushion close to the wall, with the lower body extended using the medical tool away from the bed or table. (In this context, "esturment" could refer to an instrument or tool used for extending the lower part of the body) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then position an upright rod placed on the ground near the head of the cushion and another rod at the foot of the bed on the other side of the cushion. (In this context, "fust" refers to a rod or stick) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the assistant holds onto the rod and is not fixed in place; another assistant holds onto the other one in a similar manner (In this context, "ministre" may refer to medical assistants or helpers)
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then wrap the patient's head with soft cloth bandages, leaving their nose and ears uncovered. Extend one end of the bandage to the rod near the head and tie it there; Then tighten another bandage around the thighs, knees, and calves, adjusting all the bandages and tying them to the other rod that is near the feet. (In this context, "liament" may refer to a bandage or cloth strip used for binding) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: [] [
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then each assistant extends the bandage towards their respective rod, ensuring that both rods and their attached bandages remain in place, without being tightly fastened as previously mentioned. (In this context, "cascu" may refer to each individual or helper)
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the physician places their hands with strength on the vertebra to return it to its place or places a board under it and adjusts their weight on the board until the vertebra returns to its proper position. (In this context, "taula" may refer to a flat wooden surface used for support) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return to its place with this method, then take a table that is three cubits (or about 4-5 feet) in width or length and make an opening in the wall close to the patient where the end of the table can fit in. (In this context, "brassa" may refer to a measure of distance equivalent to about 1.6-2 meters) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then place the end of the table on top of the vertebra and have the physician put their weight on the other end, pushing hard until the vertebra is compressed and returns to its proper location. (In this context, "metge" may refer to a medical practitioner or physician) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open the roll that is wrapped with your hand; and place two rods, each one arm's length, under the patient's head at the back of the pillow, and two more rods under their neck, with a space equivalent to the width of a palm between each rod. Each rod should have a hole drilled into it for the roll to pass through, and they should be securely fastened in place so that they do not move. (In this context, "torn" may refer to a scroll or roll of fabric) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And there should be a round rod with the roll wrapped around it, placed in the holes of the two rods. (In this context, "redon" may refer to a cylindrical or round object)
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And at the end of it, there is a hole where the rod fits in, with a length of one palm's width and also has holes in two other rods that match this one. (This passage describes the configuration of a medical device used for treating spinal injuries)
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then tighten the bandages you have tied at the patient's feet to the hole near their head and the bandages you have tied at their thighs to the roll near their feet. (This passage refers to a medical procedure for treating spinal injuries, with specific instructions on how to adjust the bandages)
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then each roll should be held by an assistant who turns it with their hand, and applies gentle pressure on the vertebra as previously mentioned (In this context, "ministre" may refer to a medical practitioner or assistant)
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And here is the configuration of the roll:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And after the vertebra has returned to its place and is healed, then apply a drying plaster with egg white albumen and cotton; and then place a piece of wooden board over it, with a width of three fingers or thereabouts, and a length that covers the affected area, placed over the site of the vertebra. (This passage describes the application of medical treatment for spinal injuries, including the use of a drying plaster and wooden board) [System.Collections.Generic.List`1[System.String]]: []
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And apply a linen bandage, which we mentioned, and feed the patient a delicate nourishment until they are healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If there is any residual swelling in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is appropriate to administer medicines that soften and cleanse through long-term administration with meals, which we have recommended; and a sheet of lead has already been administered to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And sometimes it happens that swelling occurs at the base of the vertebrae of the back, and it is caused by a dislocation; and it is that bone that is protruding, which must not be pushed back into place with this medicine, because it would cause you serious harm and could even lead to death.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter 31. (Note: This appears to be a heading or chapter title in the text)
De curacio de anca dislocada.	On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only involve dislocation, and do not involve what happens with other joints of small displacement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways, which are: dislocation inward, outward, forward, or backward.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And it is most commonly dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you align the healthy leg of the healthy person with the affected leg of the patient, the latter appears longer and more prominent than the former, and the patient cannot bend their knee, and it is the location where the inflammation has formed a swollen bump, because the head of the femur has moved upwards.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of dislocation outward is that the symptoms are opposite to those of inward dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of dislocation forward is that the leg extends as far as it can, but there is pain in the knee and the patient cannot walk on it, and their urine is retained and they have a swollen bump, and they must be made to walk on their toes.[5]
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of dislocation backward is that the knee does not extend, and they cannot bend their leg in front of their thigh, their leg is shorter than the other, the thigh is flaccid, and the head of the femur has moved to the back.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	However, in reducing the dislocation, you should consider if it is old and chronic, in which case you should not force a reduction, but rather wait for the body to heal itself over time; and in this case, do not attempt to push the bone back into place.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the case of a recent dislocation that is one of the four types mentioned earlier, you should strive to turn the joint and extend it outward and inward, and then move it from side to side, because it will easily return to its place without requiring further treatment.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But if it does not return to its place in this way, then you should prepare to use force and extend the leg downward, or with their hands, or with a linen bandage placed above the knee; and another person should extend their hand upward under the thigh to reach the genital area; and you should pull strongly on the ligament tied around the thigh, while keeping another person steadying the other end of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And the extension should be from the thigh to the calf, or from the back of the thigh to the small of the back.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And all these extensions should be done at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground with their body suspended in the air.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four types of dislocation.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, that will be good; but if not, then it is necessary for each type of dislocation to follow its own course of treatment.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In reducing a dislocation that is inwardly displaced, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their side; and then place the ligaments over the hip bone in the location between the head of the femur and the area below the knee; and then extend the ligament from the calf to the highest point of the thighbone.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then have another person strongly grasp the patient's arms and pull on their hip bone, extending it outward forcefully so that it returns to its proper place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type of dislocation is the easiest to treat and reduce, compared to the other types.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if the patient resists and does not follow the instructions for this type of treatment, then it is necessary to tie both of their legs together firmly with a linen bandage around their ankles and calves.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let each leg be tied together with a bandage that is four finger-widths long, and let the affected leg be extended more than the other by two finger-widths. [5](https://www.loyno.edu/~history/journal/1987-01/robertson.htm)
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And have the patient suspended by their head over a wooden beam, with their body facing downward, and at a height of two arm-lengths from the ground.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And command a strong young person to push down on the patient's hip bone with force, while another strong young person supports and pushes up from below, causing the joint to return to its proper place quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in reducing a dislocation that is outwardly displaced, it is necessary for the patient to sit on a stool as we have recommended after they have urinated; and then tie the ligaments firmly around the affected thigh and chest. [7](https://www.loyno.edu/~history/journal/1987-01/robertson.htm)
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And place two rods, one under the feet of the patient, and the other at their head; and place adjusted rods at the middle of the peak covered with a damp cloth, so that the patient is not harmed by the rod between their thighs, so that the extension to the lower parts is not restricted.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And let each assistant extend their part, and the doctor with his hand guide the reduction according to art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey this, it will be very good; and if not, place your hand carefully on that spot, as we said before in a kneeling position, to guide with your hand.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But it is necessary that the patient lie quietly on their side.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary to slightly extend the leg and place it as described on a mound; and place the palm of your right hand on the patient's shin, and with that pressure, pull down on the lower part towards the ankle.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is in the back parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended in the lower parts and should be raised from the ground; it is necessary to place them on a firm surface, as is also necessary if the hip is dislocated outwards, as we said about placing them on two supports; and have them lie on their stomach with the ligaments stretched, as we said before, without delay.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And it is necessary to administer pressure with a board on the spot where the joint is located.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And when the reduction is completed as necessary -- and the sign of the member's reduction is not hidden from you, and that is if the patient extends two legs, and when you see them aligned and the patient stretches their leg and expands their knee, then you know that the member has been returned as necessary -- and then adjust two pillows and place a paste and stretch with bandages so that the hip is not injured in any part; and have the patient rest for three or four days.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then release the ligament and paste, and compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if you see them aligned in this way, then you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then allow the patient to get up.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any sign of softness, then return and reapply the paste to that area, and stretch it as before, and leave it for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then release it, and have the patient delay in walking for some days, until they are strengthened.
Capitol .xxxii.	Capital XXXII. (This could refer to a specific chapter or section number in the medical treatise)
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The ankle is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outwards, inwards, and downwards towards the back; but it is not dislocated forwards.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of ankle dislocation is that you command the patient to bend their leg towards the hip; and if you see that they are unable to do so, then you know that the ankle is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the ways of ankle dislocation is that you make the patient lie flat, so that they can extend their leg if possible; then attach their heel to your shoulder and place their foot between yours; and then firmly hold the patient's ankle with both your palms, and pull it towards you with force, while another assistant extends the patient's other leg to allow the ankle to return to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of reduction is that their leg attaches itself to the hip with ease and without laborious effort.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a paste and attach the leg to the hip, and then bind those limbs together with a bandage for three or four days, and then release it.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And have the patient avoid walking for several days, until they are healed and strengthened.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if reduction is not possible for you, then administer strong extension with ligaments, as described in the treatment of the hip that was mentioned before.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Capital XXXIII. (This could refer to a specific chapter or section number in the medical treatise) [**Translation note: The following translations will be for new sections or chapters, based on the format of previous sections.**
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle bone (talus)
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The ankle bone (talus) can sometimes be elevated by a small displacement, and in some cases it is dislocated according to its full extent; and the dislocation of the talus can occur either inwards or outwards.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of talus dislocation is that you see it sunken on the side to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the treatment of talus displacement is relatively easy to reduce and consists of extending it gently with the hands and aligning it back into place while applying a guide.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the treatment of talus dislocation to its full extent, it is necessary to make the patient lie flat and have a strong and capable assistant stand behind the affected side in the middle of the patient's back.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you place your right hand on the patient's upper leg and your left hand below the knee in the area of the calf.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and do this twice with your left hand, and extend it; and push the heel of the foot with your right hand towards the calf without laboring.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do that two times as we have described.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the heel of the foot against the calf for the third time, and you be at the calf.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	And if the foot returns in one or two times with this method and you see it aligned properly, then that is good; but if not, then repeat the operation as necessary because it will eventually return to its proper place.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if reduction of the talus is not possible with the methods described, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground and place a firm cushion beneath them to support their pelvis and trap it between their thighs, and make sure they are well-covered with a blanket so as not to cause them any discomfort.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And have an assistant of the patient hold their thighs and another extend the leg with their hands or a band placed above the knee; and have each assistant apply pressure against extension on their respective side, while keeping the cushion between the patient's thighs to prevent their body from being pulled down by the extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And let the doctor guide the reduction with their hands and another assistant hold the healthy thigh downwards to facilitate the return of the talus to its proper place.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And when the dislocation returns to its proper place and you are satisfied with the success of the reduction, then apply a strong bandage over it and bind the leg to the thigh with a ligament.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	It is important to be cautious of the nerves that are located behind the talus bone, and not to apply the bandage too forcefully over this area in order to avoid causing any damage or excessive pain.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then let it rest for two or three days; and if the bandage has become loose, replace it.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then release the binding on the third or fourth day and forbid the patient from walking for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if the patient is forced to walk before this period, there is a risk that the dislocation may become worse and unresponsive to treatment.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	If the patient develops an abscess at the site of injury, then it is necessary to follow the previous instructions on incision and drainage in a separate location before proceeding with further treatment.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter XXXIV. (This could refer to a specific chapter or section number in the medical treatise)
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the treatment of dislocation of the toes. (based on the context, it seems like "ditz" could be a variant of "ditos" or "digitos", which means "toes" in Catalan and Spanish)
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It is necessary that the dislocated (thing) be bound with little tension in its place; and this is not difficult, beforehand it is easy.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in the joints of the back of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient lie down with their affected foot over a level surface or table, and remain still as if walking.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand with your weight, place your foot on what is above the joints, and apply pressure with your foot with strength until it returns (to its place), and make sure that it is already bound and nothing protrudes from the area.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	Then place below the patient's foot a board that supports the entire foot, with two ends, and apply traction with appropriate and firm stretching for three days; then release it and make sure the patient rests from walking for several days until recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter thirty-five.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the types of dislocation that are caused by wounds, or fractures, or both together. (based on the context, "plaga" could mean a wound, cut, or injury)
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of these causes occur, and you attempt to cure or restore the affected area, often the result is death. (this sentence seems to warn against attempting to treat certain types of injuries)
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, one should not be overconfident in treating the injury and restoring it, but rather someone who is wise in art, experienced over a long period of time, merciful and compassionate, slow, not hasty nor presumptuous; and who uses medicines that only reduce swelling at first, leaving the patient to divine judgement, unless there is hope for salvation from danger, with alleviation of illness, and some sign of recovery. (this passage emphasizes caution, experience, and humility in treating serious injuries)
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore strive to perform the reduction (of the dislocation) as soon as possible at the onset of the injury, before swelling occurs.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And if the limb returns as desired, then administer a regimen that reduces swelling and treats the wound with appropriate drying medicines. (this passage assumes that reduction of the dislocation has been successful, and now focuses on treating any associated wounds and preventing further inflammation)
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture and there are separate pieces of bone involved, then you should perform the treatment of them, and do as we have said in simple injuries (that are) preceded in their places. (this passage seems to advise following standard procedures for treating simple fractures and dislocations, when both occur together)
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And take care and avoid as much as you can any internal harm in the ways of fear, according to what my teaching has preceded; for this is better for you, your Creator, and more permanent for your glory, and truer health for your body during your lifetime. (this passage seems to emphasize caution, humility, and reverence for God in medical practice)
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasis perfectly, may God be blessed. (this passage seems to acknowledge and praise the work of a famous Islamic physician and surgeon, Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi, also known as Albucasis)
Amen.	Yes, "Amen" is often used in religious contexts to express agreement or approval with a prayer or blessing, so it seems appropriate here.
